HomeInternational Students
International StudentsImmigration AssistanceThe Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) assists international students and their families with the process of acquiring and maintaining nonimmigrant visa status. New StudentsThe first step for a newly admitted international student is to learn about the student visa options and the visa application process. Below, you can find the step-by-step instructions for entire procedure, from completing the immigration document (I-20/DS-2019) request to entry into the United States.

Types of student visas
Steps for new students
Financial Document Requirements
Current StudentsMaintaining visa status requires students to comply with a variety of federal regulations. Visas and immigration records may also need to be changed if you take a break in your studies, require an extension, or lose immigration status due to a violation.
Visa compliance and requirements
Extending F-1 or J-1 Visa Status
Changes in visa status
Family of International StudentsAn F-1 or J-1 student can bring his or her spouse and children to the United States; they will be classified as F-2 or J-2 dependents. Like new students, dependents will need to apply for dependent visa status, which carries certain requirements and restrictions.

Visas for family/dependents
Transfer-in StudentsTransferring your F-1 or J-1 status to Northwestern University from another school in the U.S. requires several steps. Our Transfer a SEVIS Record to NU resource provides detailed information on the steps involved, deadlines, Northwestern SEVIS codes and more.
Transfer a SEVIS Record to NU
Student Employment Both F-1 and J-1 students may work on-campus up to 20 hours per week while classes are in session
F-1 students may apply for Curricular Practical Training (CPT) to work off campus during their academic program and Optional Practical Training (OPT) for 12-month work authorization if they have been full-time students for at least one academic year and plan to seek employment in the United States in their fields of study.. 
J-1 students can pursue Academic Training (AT), either during or after their academic programs.
Learn MoreGetting Ready for NorthwesternNew students can prepare for life in the United States. Read about the steps that need to be completed before you leave—such as fulfilling health requirements and securing housing—as well as the process for arrival and transit to our campus. After mandatory check-in, you will attend orientation. Prepare for ArrivalSee important stepsOrientationAttend GISO or ISO
By the NumbersInternational students make up 25% of Northwestern's student body and enrich the academic experience of all students by contributing to the cultural diversity of our campus. Each year, Northwestern also hosts hundreds of international scholars, who contribute to more than 20 disciplines.More on our international community4808International Students142Countries Represented1379International ScholarsGetting StartedLearn about visa options and the application process.for students
See Steps for Newly Admitted Students
Read about the process to request a Form I-20 or DS-2019
all student resourcesfor faculty, staff & scholars
Compare visas using the Visa Options Guide
Explore Legal Permanent Residence
all scholar resourcesfor host departments
Read the General Hosting Guide
Access Host Department Forms
Read the General Hosting Guide
Access Host Department Forms
all department resourcesStudent EmploymentOISS helps students apply for off-campus work authorization (permission) during their academic programs (CPT) and after completing their degrees (OPT).
Learn more about eligibility, application procedures and processing times for:
CPT (Curricular Practical Training)
OPT (Optional Practical Training)
Living in the USFind guidance and resources as you adjust to life at Northwestern and the United States.OrientationGet More InfoHousingGet More InfoHealth & WellnessGet More InfoTaxesGet More InfoSocial SecurityGet More InfoTravelGet More InfoHow can we help?Advisors are available via email, virtual advisement and scheduled appointmentscontact your advisorNews & EventsEventsApr32024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...Apr52024Coffee Talk Spring 20243:00 PM International Student and Scholar Services, 630 Dartmouth PlaceAll NU students and scholars from the Evanston and Chicago campuses are welcome to attend!
This is a community support s...Apr92024Virtual Tax Workshop for International Students & Scholars 2:00 PMWas 2023 your first year in the United States? Have you been in the United States for more than 5 calendar years? Posses...News & AnnouncementsUSCIS announces fee increase to certain immigration benefit requests to go into effect April 1, 2024February 21, 2024USCIS has announced that certain fees, including the I-765 application fee for Employment Authorization and I-539 application fee to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant status, will increase on April 1, 2024. Learn more and see the new fee schedule from USCIS.New online OPT Course - now required for OPT requestsJanuary 10, 2024Read full details and learn how to access and complete the course on the OISS OPT webpage.
HomeInternational Students
International StudentsImmigration AssistanceThe Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) assists international students and their families with the process of acquiring and maintaining nonimmigrant visa status. New StudentsThe first step for a newly admitted international student is to learn about the student visa options and the visa application process. Below, you can find the step-by-step instructions for entire procedure, from completing the immigration document (I-20/DS-2019) request to entry into the United States.

Types of student visas
Steps for new students
Financial Document Requirements
Current StudentsMaintaining visa status requires students to comply with a variety of federal regulations. Visas and immigration records may also need to be changed if you take a break in your studies, require an extension, or lose immigration status due to a violation.
Visa compliance and requirements
Extending F-1 or J-1 Visa Status
Changes in visa status
Family of International StudentsAn F-1 or J-1 student can bring his or her spouse and children to the United States; they will be classified as F-2 or J-2 dependents. Like new students, dependents will need to apply for dependent visa status, which carries certain requirements and restrictions.

Visas for family/dependents
Transfer-in StudentsTransferring your F-1 or J-1 status to Northwestern University from another school in the U.S. requires several steps. Our Transfer a SEVIS Record to NU resource provides detailed information on the steps involved, deadlines, Northwestern SEVIS codes and more.
Transfer a SEVIS Record to NU
Student Employment Both F-1 and J-1 students may work on-campus up to 20 hours per week while classes are in session
F-1 students may apply for Curricular Practical Training (CPT) to work off campus during their academic program and Optional Practical Training (OPT) for 12-month work authorization if they have been full-time students for at least one academic year and plan to seek employment in the United States in their fields of study.. 
J-1 students can pursue Academic Training (AT), either during or after their academic programs.
Learn MoreGetting Ready for NorthwesternNew students can prepare for life in the United States. Read about the steps that need to be completed before you leave—such as fulfilling health requirements and securing housing—as well as the process for arrival and transit to our campus. After mandatory check-in, you will attend orientation. Prepare for ArrivalSee important stepsOrientationAttend GISO or ISO
HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student Visas
About Student VisasStudent VisasInternational students at Northwestern use F-1 and J-1 visas. The type used will depend on the student's program type and funding. Types of Student VisasUnderstanding Immigration DocumentsAdmitted international students will need to apply for either a Form I-20 or DS-2019 in order to apply for a U.S. F-1 or J-1 visa for study in the U.S.Learn about I-20 & Student VisaMaintaining F-1 or J-1 StatusFederal regulations require all international students to maintain their F-1 or J-1 status while residing in the U.S.Learn about RegulationsWhat if my visa expires while I am in the United States?A visa in your passport issued by a U.S. consulate does not determine how long you can remain in the United States; it is only an entry document. Therefore, you may stay in the U. S. beyond the expiration date of a visa as long as you are maintaining your F-1 or J-1 status and the immigration document (I-20 or DS-2019) remains valid.
For international travel and re-entry to the U.S., the immigration document, passport and visa must be valid and unexpired. If the visa is expired it will be necessary to apply for a new visa, through the same process as your initial visa application, at a U.S. embassy or consulate outside the U.S. For more information about international travel, visit the F-1 & J-1 Travel webpage.Visa ChangesStudents currently or previously registered at Northwestern may need to change their visa status. Read instructions for extending or reinstating visa status, changing visa statuses and more.
Extending F-1 or J-1 visa status
Leave of absence and withdrawal
Reinstating F-1 or J-1 visa status after a violation
Changing visa status

HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasTypes of Student Visas
Types of Student VisasF-1The F-1 visa is the most common visa used by international students at Northwestern. Most international students are eligible for an F-1 visa as long as they have been admitted to Northwestern and can show proof of funding for at least the first year of study.J-1The J-1 status is often used for students who are in a specific educational exchange program such as Fulbright.  
Regular degree-seeking students are also eligible for the J-1 visa if a majority (51% or more) of their total financial funding comes from sources other than personal funds.  Funds other than personal funds may include any of the following:

Scholarship or Grant
Fellowship from an external funding source
Home country government
International Organization
Corporate Sponsor
Please note that funding through loans of any kind, including NU loans, are considered personal funds and do not qualify.
Currently enrolled students who wish to discuss a possible change of status between F-1 and J-1 should review the information below and then schedule an appointment with their OISS Advisor.Which visa is right for you?Download the F-1 – J-1 Comparison Chart to compare these visas or watch a video to learn more.
J-1 Status and the Impact on Long-Term Plans
Two-year Home Country Residency Requirement 212(e)
Some J-1 visa holders are subject to the two-year residency requirement.  F-1 students are not subjected to this requirement.  The requirement applies to J-1 visa holders at Northwestern if:

They receive funding from the U.S. Government or from their home country government.
The field of study is included in the U.S. Government's Exchange Visitor Skills List.
The J-1 visa holder is receiving graduate medical education or training.
J-1 visa holders who are subject to the two-year residency requirement must reside for an aggregate of two years in the home country of citizenship or the last country of legal permanent residency, or have the requirement waived before being eligible for the H, L, or permanent residency immigration statuses. J-2 spouses are also subject to the Two-Year Residency Requirement if their primary J-1 visa holder is subject. 
NOTE: Obtaining a waiver of this requirement can be difficult and expensive and will likely require the assistance of an immigration attorney.  212(e) status does not prevent a visitor from returning to the U.S. in another visa status such as F-1 student, B1/B2 as a tourist or for business or under the visa waiver program. Returning to the U.S. in one of these categories may postpone your Two-Year Home Residency requirement, but it will not eliminate it.
Please refer to the Department of State website for more information.
HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasVisas for Spouses and Children
Visas for Spouses and ChildrenAn F-1 or J-1 student may bring his or her spouse and children to the U.S. These family members are admitted as F-2 or J-2 dependents. Jump to information about restrictions for these visa statuses.
About this classification:

Dependent children must be unmarried and under 21 years of age.
The Office of International Student and Scholar Services will issue an I-20 or DS-2019 for a fianceé(e), but you will need to demonstrate proof of marriage during the visa interview to obtain F-2 or J-2 status.

How to Apply for Dependent Visa Status
F-1/J-1 students hoping to add a spouse or children as F-2/J-2 dependents must submit the following information through the OISS Portal when applying for your I-20/DS-2019:
Financial documentation, in the form of: (1) a copy of your proof of funding, such as a recent official bank statement; (2) a letter (on bank letterhead with the bank officer’s signature, seal or stamp) confirming your funds; or (3) a Northwestern University letter of funding.Multiple funding sources are permitted.
Amounts should reflect at least $7,320 per year (or $610 per month) for each dependent (spouse or child).
A copy of the dependent's passport identification page

Processing time for completed applications is one week.
F-2 Dependent Visa Restrictions
Study

F-2 spouses may study part-time. This means an F-2 spouse can begin a part-time academic program at Northwestern or another area university. 
F-2 children may study full-time in K-12 schools (elementary, middle/junior high and high school).
Employment
F-2 dependents may not accept employment or engage in business under any circumstance. Please contact an advisor in our office if you have questions.
J-2 Dependent Visa Restrictions
All J-1 visa regulations which apply to the J-1 Exchange Visitor, also apply to the J-2 dependent including 212 (e) home residency requirements.
Study

J-2 dependents are eligible for full or part time study.
If a J-2 spouse wishes to enroll in a full-time degree-seeking program at NU or any other post-secondary institution, it may be advantageous to consider a change of visa status to F-1 or J-1 student.
Employment
J-2 dependents are eligible for full or part time employment. J-2 dependents must file form I-765 with USCIS and receive the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) card before beginning employment.
Health Insurance Requirements
The Department of State regulations governing the J-1 Exchange Visitor Program require that all J-1 exchange visitors and their J-2 dependents have health insurance coverage that meets the following requirements.

Medical benefits of at least $100,000 per accident or illness
Repatriation of remains in the amount of $25,000
Expenses associated with the medical evacuation of the exchange visitor to his or her home country in the amount of $50,000
A deductible not to exceed $500 per accident or illness.

It is your responsibility to monitor that you and your dependents have such insurance while living with you in the US; failure to comply with this regulation could result in the loss of your J-1 status.
HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasVisa Compliance Requirements
Visa Compliance and RequirementsFederal regulations require all international students to maintain their F-1 or J-1 status while residing in the U.S.Learn About RegulationsMaintain I-20/DS-2019 AccuracyAny changes to the information that appears on your I-20 or DS-2019 must be up-to-date. This information includes:

Academic updates or changes (including change in academic level/program)
Financial information
Personal information

If any of the above changes, please request an update to your I-20/ DS-2019 through the OISS Portal.
Understanding your Immigration Document provides additional information about your immigration document.
Academic Updates or Changes
If you need to change the degree-completion date listed on your I-20 or DS-2019, you must apply for an I-20 or DS-2019 extension prior to the expiration date listed. Request your extension at the OISS Portal. 
Report any changes to your academic major/program.
Report a change in your academic level, such as a change from Master's to PhD or PhD to Master’s.

Financial Information
Report any financial support/funding changes, such as a change from scholarship funds to family funding. Contact your OISS Advisor if you need to update your financial information.  
Personal Information
Report changes such as name, dependent name, or immigration status:
Report a change of legal (passport) name to your OISS Advisor. You must submit a copy of your new passport before OISS can update your immigration documents and SEVIS record.  
Report any name changes for your dependents. 
Notify the Office of International Student and Scholar Services if you obtain another immigration status. You will also need to submit a copy of your USCIS Approval Notice, Green Card, etc. 
 At this time, OISS is unable to process any changes in gender that are not along the gender binary of male/female. The SEVIS system only allows for one of two genders in the system. If your gender changes along the gender binary M/F, you will need to submit a copy of your updated passport before we can change that in SEVIS and on your immigration documents.  
Always maintain a valid passport while you are in the U.S. You do not need to send a copy of your new passport to OISS unless you are requesting a personal information update.
Full-time Enrollment RequirementFederal immigration regulations require nonimmigrant students in F-1 or J-1 status to be enrolled in a full-time course load each term to maintain nonimmigrant visa status. Students who are not enrolled full time by the end of each add/drop period or who drop below full-time without approval by the OISS violate their student immigration status.
OISS is committed to working closely with NU schools, departments, students, and the Office of the Registrar to ensure all students are enrolled in a full course load each term.
Full-time enrollment is required in the summer term only if it is a student's first or last term of enrollment.
Students must be physically present on Northwestern's campus during every quarter of enrollment unless otherwise approved for study or research abroad.
Defining Full-time Enrollment
Undergraduates are considered to be full time when they enroll in 3.00 units of credit or more per quarter
Pritzker School of Law:  LLM and MSL programs define full-time enrollment as 8 or more credits per semester.JD programs (including JDMBA) define full-time enrollment as 9 or more credits per semester


All other graduate students are considered to be full time when they enroll in 3.00 units of credit or more per quarter.
What happens if I am not fully enrolled?
OISS is required to report in the Student Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS) whether a student is enrolled full-time at Northwestern University, received an authorized reduced course load, dropped below a full course of study without prior authorization by a Designated School Official (OISS Advisor), or failed to enroll.
Failure to meet the full-time enrollment requirement without an approved authorized reduced course load may result in your SEVIS record being terminated.
 
 Online coursework and on-campus presenceDo online classes count toward full-time enrollment?
For both graduate and undergraduate F-1 and J-1 students, only one unit or 1 credit of online/remote course may count toward the full-time enrollment requirement. The one unit/credit limit is for every academic term when students are expected to be enrolled full-time.
If F-1 or J-1 students enroll in more than their minimum unit requirement, they MAY enroll in more than one unit of online/remote courses.
Hybrid courses with required on-campus components do not count towards this limitation.
Students on an approved reduced course load (see below) cannot be enrolled in only online/remote coursework.
What does "on-campus presence" mean?
What does "on-campus presence" mean?
On-campus presence refers to the regulatory requirement for international students in F-1 or J-1 status to enroll in coursework that "requires the student's physical attendance for classes, examination or other purposes integral to the completion of the class." Students must register for a certain number of credit hours that are taught using an instruction mode that requires in-person attendance. Students must be physically present on campus during every quarter of enrollment unless otherwise approved for study or research abroad.Exceptions to the Full-Time Enrollment RequirementUnder certain circumstances, F-1 students may receive approval from OISS to enroll in a reduced course load and maintain their student status.
If you need a reduced course load for medical reasons or academic difficulties, talk with your OISS Advisor as soon as possible. You cannot drop below a full course of study unless your OISS Advisor approves the reduced course load and updates your student record in SEVIS.
More information about exceptions to the full-time enrollment requirement
Reduced Course Load (RCL) for Specific Academic Reasons  - see below
Reduced Course Load (RCL) for a Documented Medical Condition  - see below
Reduced Course Load (RCL) for final term 
Annual Vacation Quarter – most students will use the summer quarter as their annual vacation. Unless the summer quarter is your program's first or last term, you are not required to be enrolled. If you enroll full-time in the summer quarter, you may be eligible to use a different quarter (fall, winter, spring) as your annual vacation. Contact your OISS Advisor for more information on this possible exception.
Online courses and RCL
Students cannot be enrolled in only online coursework, even if approved for a reduced course load by OISS. See below for more information on reduced course load (RCL).
 
 Reduced Course Load (RCL) for Academic ReasonsIn certain situations, students may be authorized for less than full-time enrollment for specific academic reasons.   
Academic Reduced Course Load
A reduced course load for specific academic reasons requires recommendation of student’s academic or major advisor. There are three types of academic reduced course loads available to international students:
A final-term student completing their course of study who does not require a full course load to complete. 
Academic difficulties due to initial difficulty with the English language or reading requirements, unfamiliarity with U.S. teaching methods, or improper course level placement. This is only applicable during the first quarter; student must resume a full course load at the next academic term.   
Concurrent enrollment at another approved institution. Between both schools, enrollment equates to a full course of study. Please note:  

More than half of the units must be at Northwestern.  
The student must have prior approval from their department and the Registrar's Office verifying the courses taken at another institution will be counted toward the degree program.
Note
Students cannot be enrolled in only online coursework, even if approved for a reduced course load by OISS. 
How to Apply for a Reduced Course Load
If you qualify for Reduced Course Load, please submit your request at the OISS Portal. If you request a reduced course load for academic difficulties or concurrent enrollment, please email or schedule an appointment with your OISS Advisor.  Reduced Course Load (RCL) for Medical Reasons Medical Reduced Course Load 
Students may apply for RCL due to a medical condition documented by a licensed medical doctor (MD), doctor of osteopathy (DO), psychiatrist, licensed psychologist, or clinical psychologist. Please note:
A reduced course load for medical reasons may be recommended for more than one term but cannot exceed 12-months. Students must reapply for a medical reduced course load each term.  
For students not working with Student Assistance and Support Services (SASS), additional documentation is required. A letter is needed which must include and specify recommendations from the physician, psychiatrist, or psychologist on whether the student should have part-time or no enrollment, as well as indicating the term for which the reduced course load is applicable.  
Students cannot be enrolled in only online coursework in their first or last semester, even if approved for a reduced course load by OISS.
Students on approved medical RCLs are not eligible for CPT employment authorization.
How to Apply for a Medical Reduced Course Load 
If you qualify for Reduced Course Load, please submit your request at the OISS Portal. Abide by Employment and Internship RegulationsFederal regulations limit F-1 and J-1 student employment options.
Regulations for On-Campus Work

You may work up to 20 hours a week at an on-campus job while school is in session.
You may work full-time at an on-campus job during holiday breaks and the summer vacation.
On-campus authorization ends with the end date of your I-20 or DS-2019. After this, you will need additional authorization such as OPT or AT.

Regulations for Off-Campus Work
Regulations vary depending on your visa status

Students with an F-1 visa
Students with a J-1 visa
Students with an F-1 visa
Students with a J-1 visa

Off-campus work requires prior authorization
You my not work off-campus without prior approval and authorization from OISS.
To attain authorization, please review our student employment information and then meet with an advisor if you have questions.Maintain Personal Information AccuracyMaintain Address Information
U.S. federal immigration regulations require all international students to maintain a permanent foreign address and current U.S. address. These are maintained as your Permanent (non-U.S. address) and Current (U.S. address) Address in CAESAR, and these are automatically reported to SEVIS.
Failure to correctly maintain these addresses may result in a delay in processing any requests.
How to Update your Addresses in CAESAR
Use CAESAR's instructions to navigate to My Addresses.
Select the Edit button next to the address type you would like to edit, or select the Add a New Address button if the address type you are adding has not yet been created.

Your Current Address must be a U.S. address. Change the country type using the Change Country hyperlink.
Your Permanent Address must be a non-U.S. address. Change the country type using the Change Country hyperlink.


Select the OK button when finished, and then select Save to save your changes.

Maintain Emergency Information
All NU students are required to maintain accurate emergency information in their CAESAR account, which includes listing your emergency contacts phone number and address.
How to update your emergency contact in CAESAR

Use CAESAR's instructions to navigate to Emergency Contact
Select the Edit button next to the contact you would like to edit, or select the Add Emergency Contacts button if the contact has not yet been created.
If your emergency contact's phone number is in the United States, be sure to first select the USA checkbox.
If your emergency contact's phone number is in the United States, be sure to first select the Int checkbox.


Select the Save button to save your changes.
Abide by Travel RestrictionsInternational students in F-1 or J-1 status may travel within the U.S. or abroad during their tenure at Northwestern, but they must follow certain travel restrictions. 
Visit the Student Travel webpage to learn about these requirements. Purchase Health InsuranceAll new and returning full-time international students are required to purchase the Northwestern Aetna Student Plan; no exceptions or waivers will be granted. Learn more about this requirement.Please note that additional regulations may impact compliance. Consult your OISS Advisor for questions and additional guidance. 
Additional Resources:
DHS Study in the States Full Course of Study: https://studyinthestates.dhs.gov/students/study/full-course-of-study
NU course load policies: https://www.registrar.northwestern.edu/registration-graduation/registration/course-load-policies.html

HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasExtending F-1 or J-1 Visa Status
Extending F-1 or J-1 Visa StatusIf you require additional time to complete your academic program, then you will need to extend your I-20 or DS-2019.  Extending your I-20/DS-2019 also extends your F-1/J-1 status.  You must apply for an extension before your I-20/DS-2019 end date!  Failure to do so may result in inconvenient and costly travel abroad in order to regain status. 
Extension Eligibility
To be eligible for an extension, a student must have an academic, medical, or family emergency reason. Some examples include:
Change of major, addition of major, or addition of minor
Change in research topic
Unexpected research problems
Additional time needed to complete required classes
Documented medical illness
Approved Leave of Absence for personal, medical, or family reasons
How to Apply for an Extension
Submit your Program Extension request in the OISS Portal at least 2 weeks before your I-20/DS-2019 Program End Date. Your Program Extension request is sent to your academic advisor, as indicated by you in the request. Your recommender confirms that you need an extension and for which reason and term. Your OISS advisor begins processing your request once it is in “Submitted” status in the portal.
F-1 Students: 
If you have a significant change in your source of funding, you must submit new proof of funding documents to cover the extended period of your I-20. If your funding source has not changed, you are not required to submit new proof of funding documents.
J-1 Students: 
You must provide proof of sufficient funding to cover the extended period of your I-20/DS-2019.  You may provide a bank statement, bank letter or letter from your department/program.
NOTE: if your advisor/department will be funding your extension then you may obtain a letter that reflects the funding guarantee.
 Please review the financial documentation requirements for more details on what documents are acceptable.
 
Processing
Please note that the processing time for an approved (by the academic advisor) and submitted extension application is up to 5 business days.
HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasLeave of Absence or Withdrawal
Leave of Absence or WithdrawalQuestions?Contact your OISS advisor.If you are taking a temporary leave of absence or withdrawing from Northwestern altogether, you must withdraw your SEVIS record. Please note that once you have officially withdrawn, your grace period is 15 days and should leave the U.S. as quickly as possible.
How to withdraw your SEVIS record

We recommend consulting with your  OISS advisor as a first step. We can provide guidance and clarification regarding the withdrawal or leave process.
Complete the "Leave of Absence or Withdrawal Request" on the OISS Portal.
When you are preparing to return to your academic program, review the information and follow the steps below.
Returning to NU  after a break in studies (Leave of Absence)
A returning student is defined as a student who, in the past, was accepted and enrolled at Northwestern University but withdrew from Northwestern for personal reasons, medical leave, family emergencies, academic suspension, required military service or any other reason. This student's previous SEVIS record was terminated.  
If you were away from Northwestern for less than 5 months, contact your OISS advisor to determine if you are eligible for a SEVIS reactivation.  
How to return after a break
1. For medical leaves only: Contact SASS for return approval.
2. Request re-entry to NU with the Registrar's Office.
Instructions for re-entry are located on the Office of the Registrar's website. Students are advised to inform their academic advisor, major advisor, faculty advisor, dean, or department chair to begin the process of reactivating their student status at Northwestern University. 
3. Determine next step with OISS Advisor
For students on a temporary leave of absence for less than five months - Contact your OISS Advisor to determine if you qualify for SEVIS reactivation.    
For students returning from a leave of absence for more than five months - Follow the instructions in steps 4 & 5 below. 

4. Complete and submit required documentation
Once your re-entry has been approved by your program/department, you will need to complete the New Student Immigration Document Request in the OISS Portal. Be prepared to upload the following documentation:
Completed (signed) FRET form confirming your return – in replacement of your original admission letter from Northwestern. For TGS students, include instead the email approval from TGS that includes your estimated completion time to finish your degree (final term of enrollment).
Financial documentation - review accepted forms of financial documentation.
Copy of passport
Please complete this request at least three months before the start of the quarter you hope to return to Northwestern.

5. Final steps after your I-20 or DS-2019 is issued:
5. Final steps after your I-20 or DS-2019 is issued:

Access the immigration document (I-20 or DS-2019) electronically via the OISS portal. You will need to print and sign the document in blue ink in the "Student Attestation" section of the document.
Pay the SEVIS Fee.
Confirm your visa expiration date. If your F-1 or J-1 visa has expired,  review information on how to obtain a visa stamp.
Check-in with OISS upon arrival to the U.S.
When planning your schedule, be sure to enroll full-time during the first quarter you return.

HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasChanging Visa Status
Changing Visa StatusCheck Out Our Change of Status GuideOur Change of Status Guide answers questions such as:
How early should I submit my application?
Can I study, work, or receive NU funding before my new status has been approved?
When can I begin work on OPT or CPT?
 When you enter the United States in nonimmigrant status, you do so for a specific purpose, such as study, work, or travel. You may enter the U.S. with one purpose and later wish to change your purpose. When this happens, you may need to obtain a new visa status. Different visa categories allow different activities. 
This webpage contains general information about changing via status. It is not legal advice and OISS advisors are not attorneys. We recommend you consult an immigration attorney about gaining a new status. 
There are two ways to gain a new nonimmigrant status: Travel and reentry to the U.S. in the new visa status OR aapplying for change of status from within the U.S. 
Option 1: Travel and Reentry
Option 1: Travel and Reentry
In this case, you would depart the U.S. and then apply for an F-1 or J-1 visa at a U.S. embassy or consulate abroad, preferably the local consulate in your home country. If the F-1 or J-1 visa application is approved and the corresponding visa is issued, you can re-enter the U.S. using your F-1 Form I-20 and F-1 visa (or DS-2019 and J-1 Visa) . At the Port of Entry, your electronic I-94 will be updated to show your status as F-1 and the Admit Until Date as D/S, which confirms F-1 status. 
Please note that Canadian citizens are exempt from the requirement of a having an F-1 visa to re-enter the U.S. in F-1 status. But travel and re-entry are still required for Canadian citizens to obtain F-1 status. 
Read on for more information on the process as well as advantages and disadvantages. 
Process
Gather documents related to new status. 
Leave the U.S. 
Apply for a new visa at a U.S. consulate outside the U.S. (Canadians are not required to apply for a new entry visa.) 
Re-enter the U.S. with the new visa and other relevant documents. You will gain your new status when you are admitted into the U.S. 

Advantages

This process is usually faster than changing status in the U.S. 
You will obtain the entry visa and the status.

Disadvantages

Possibility of visa processing delay 
Expense and logistics of travel
For those seeking F-1 or J-1 student visa status:
Plan your travel timeline carefully. You cannot enter the U.S. in F-1 or J-1 status earlier than 30 days before your I-20 or DS-2019 start date.
Option 2: Change of Status in the U.S.
This option takes a longer time. USCIS will generally not approve a change of status more than 30 days before the beginning of the program of study. In addition, your current status must be valid at the time of adjudication. Therefore, if you have a status that ends before USCIS can approve a change of status, you must apply for a bridge application. The bridge application may be an extension of your current status if this is possible or an application for visitor status (B-2) while the other application is pending. Therefore, the timing of a change of status application can be tricky.
Because USCIS will not notify OISS of your Change of Status approval or denial, you must inform OISS of the approval or denial. If the I-20 or DS-2019 date expires before adjudication by USCIS, your I-20 or DS-2019 start date must be deferred because the I-20 or DS-2019 will auto-cancel in 60 days, making the I-20 or DS-2019 invalid. Also, if you leave the U.S. while this application is pending, USCIS will consider it an abandoned application and deny it. 
Given the difficulty a change of status may pose in some situations, we strongly recommend you consult an attorney who specializes in immigration.  
Read on to learn more about the Change of Status application process, advantages and disadvantages, eligibility requirements, restrictions, and more.  
Process
Gather documents related to new status. 
Submit an I-539 application to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) for a change of status.  
Wait for USCIS processing. If approved, USCIS will give you official documentation of your new status. Provide a copy of your USCIS Receipt Notice to OISS 




If you have been admitted to a program of study at Northwestern University and are applying to change your visa status to F-1 or J-1 from within the U.S., you will need to submit the following to the appropriate USCIS office:
A completed and signed Form I-539. The I-539 is available in the Forms section on the USCIS web site. 
Processing fee A check or money order must be made out to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Check the USCIS I-539 instructions for the current fee. 
An original I-20 or DS-2019 issued by Northwestern University. See the Steps for Newly Admitted Students section of the OISS website for detailed instructions. Make sure that you provide all pages of the immigration document (Form I-20 or DS-2019). The form must be  signed by both you and the appropriate school official in the appropriate places. 
Proof of SEVIS fee payment You can pay the SEVIS fee online at https://www.fmjfee.com/i901fee/index.html.  (Note that you must have the I-20/DS-2019 to pay the SEVIS fee.)
Proof of adequate financial support This documentation includes original bank documents, student loan information, scholarships, fellowships, teaching or research assistantships indicating that you or your sponsor has the financial ability to cover your educational and living expenses for one full academic year. The amount you must prove will be indicated on your I-20 or DS-2019. 
Photocopies of passport Include both biographical and current visa pages. 
Form I-94, accessible online at www.cbp.gov/I94 
Dependent(s) documentation: photocopies of passport biographical page(s), current visa stamp(s), I-94 cards, their original I-20 or DS-2019 issued by Northwestern University. Include these if you have dependent(s) that are applying for a change of status to F-2 or J-2 with you. Additionally, you must provide financial support for your dependent(s). The amount is indicated on your I-20 or DS-2019. 
Additional documents may be needed.
Important Notes:

We strongly recommend you consult with an immigration attorney when applying for Change of Status via the I-539.  
If your plans change and you must travel outside the U.S. before F-1 status is approved, notify OISS. You should withdraw your Change of Status application with USCIS and follow the steps for Option 1: Travel and Reentry. 





Advantages 

Ability to stay in the U.S. during processing. 
Avoid the time and expense of travel abroad and new visa application (for now — A new entry visa will be required to re-enter the U.S. if you travel in the future). 
You will have to pay the I-539 application fee.  

Disadvantages
Disadvantages 

USCIS processing can be very slow, which may jeopardize your ability to begin your new activity, such as studying or accepting a research or teaching assistantship. Current approximate processing times can be found on the USCIS website. 
You must stay in the U.S. during processing; exiting the U.S. cancels the application. 
You must still obtain a visa stamp to match your status the next time you travel outside the U.S. (except for Canadian citizens). 
Possibility of denial, which could require you to depart the U.S. 

Eligibility 
You may be able to change status if: 

You are maintaining your current status. 
You are eligible for the new status. 
Your current visa status does not prohibit change of status in the U.S. Review the restrictions below. 

You generally cannot change status if:
You generally cannot change status if: 

Your period of authorized stay has already expired. 
Your current nonimmigrant status does not allow a change of status in the U.S.  
You have otherwise violated the conditions of your current status. 

Restrictions 

Individuals in J status who are subject to the two-year home-country residence requirement can change only to A or G status. 
Persons admitted under the Visa Waiver Program (marked “W/T” or “W/B” on the I-94) cannot change nonimmigrant status. 
Persons who hold C, D, or K status cannot change nonimmigrant status. 
A vocational student in M status cannot change to F status.
HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasSEVIS Transfer Out
SEVIS Transfer OutAdmission to a new school does not by itself authorize an international student in F-1 or J-1 status to begin studying full-time at the new school.
You must submit a “Transfer Out” request via the OISS Portal to transfer/release your SEVIS immigration record to your new school before you can begin full-time studies there. This process is called a “SEVIS transfer.” It is different from an “academic transfer.”Eligibility for a SEVIS Record Transfer: F-1 Students
You must currently be maintaining F-1 status
You must have an offer of admission from a new SEVP-certified school
If you graduated and did not apply for OPT, you must still be within your 60-day grace period
If you completed OPT, you must still be within your 60-day grace period
The start of classes at your new school must be within 5 months of one of the following:
a) academic program completion at Northwestern
                b) last day of enrollment at Northwestern (if not graduating from Northwestern)
                c) OPT authorization end date
If the period of time between F-1 activities is longer than 5 months, your SEVIS record is not eligible for transfer. Your new school must issue a new initial I-20 with a new SEVIS number.Eligibility for a SEVIS Record Transfer: J-1 Students
You must currently be maintaining J-1 status
You must have an offer of admission from a new SEVP-certified school
Your J-1 record must be active and your program end date must not have passed
The start of classes at your new school must be immediately (if mid-term) or at the next available term
Request to transfer out for current students and alumni on OPT or AT
Request to transfer out for current students and alumni on OPT or AT
To transfer your SEVIS immigration record to another institution when you are a current Northwestern student, or after Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Academic Training (AT), you need to:
Gain admission to the new SEVP-certified institution.
Check what is needed by the new school to obtain a new I-20 or DS-2019. Some institutions require a form signed by an international student advisor to verify current status.
Complete the “Transfer Out” request in the OISS Portal. You will need to provide:




                a)   New school name and address


                b)   Official admission letter from the new school


                c)   Transfer release date (the date you want Northwestern to transfer your SEVIS immigration                          record to the new institution)


                d)   SEVIS Code for new school
d)   SEVIS Code for new school



       4.  Complete the new institution’s requirements to obtain a new I-20 or DS-2019.
 Transfer out timing considerationsThe “Transfer Out” request will ask you for a “Transfer out release date”. Only one school at a time can access your SEVIS record. On the transfer/release date, SEVIS access “transfers” from Northwestern University to your new school.
On the SEVIS transfer/release date, Northwestern University OISS staff no longer have access to your SEVIS record. Your new school gains access to your electronic SEVIS record; your new school can create your new I-20 or DS-2019.
You should consider the following when choosing your SEVIS transfer/release date:
You cannot continue to work on the Northwestern campus beyond the release date.
If you are a currently enrolled Northwestern student, the date should be AFTER the end date of the last semester of enrollment at Northwestern.
If you are currently authorized for Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Academic Training (AT), the employment authorization automatically terminates when the “transfer-out release date” passes. Choose a release date that is AFTER the last day you intend to work on OPT or AT.
If you are traveling internationally between the end of your last term at Northwestern and the first semester at the new institution, you cannot re-enter the U.S. on your Northwestern I-20 or DS-2019 after your transfer release date. You must obtain a Transfer Pending I-20 or new DS-2019 from the new school and enter using that document if you are re-entering after the release date.
The transfer-in school may have deadlines to meet regarding transfer procedures and issuance of your new I-20 or DS-2019. Check with the appropriate office at the new school.
Request to transfer out before attending Northwestern UniversityIf you have entered the U.S. with an I-20 or DS-2019 from Northwestern but have decided to attend a different institution, you must complete the immigration transfer process to release your immigration record to the new institution. Follow these steps:
Complete and submit the online “check in” request via the OISS Portal. This step verifies you have arrived in the U.S.
Complete and submit the “Transfer Out” request via the OISS Portal.
Frequently Asked QuestionsHow does my transfer affect my travel plans to leave and re-enter the U.S.?You must re-enter the U.S. on the I-20 or DS-2019 from the new school. It is important to discuss your travel plans with your international student advisor at the new school so that an appropriate “transfer out” date and new I-20 or DS-2019 issuance can be coordinated to facilitate your travel.Is my current visa valid if I am transferring between institutions?If you have followed the proper transfer procedures, you can use your current, unexpired F-1 or J-1 visa to re-enter the U.S. Please be aware that CBP has the authority to make decisions on entry for all U.S. visitors.
If your F-1 or J-1 visa will expire in the time between institutions, remember you can stay in the U.S. on an expired visa as long as you are following the correct SEVIS transfer procedures. You must apply for a new F-1 or J-1 visa if you travel internationally and wish to re-enter the U.S.How does my transfer out affect my OPT or AT authorization?If you are currently authorized for OPT or AT, choose your SEVIS transfer/release date carefully. AT or OPT authorization ends on the “transfer out” date, even if the OPT EAD card is not yet expired. If you plan to work between programs while on OPT or AT, coordinate with your advisers at both schools to determine an appropriate “transfer out” date.Can I stay in the U.S. between programs?You may stay in the U.S. between programs if the SEVIS record transfer procedures are correctly followed. If the period between programs is longer than 5 months (F-1 students) or longer than one academic term (J-1 students), your new school must issue a new
(F-1 students) or longer than one academic term (J-1 students), your new school must issue a new initial I-20 or DS-2019 with a new SEVIS number. You must leave the U.S. within your 60-day grace period (F-1 students) or 30-day grace period (J-1 students) and re-enter no earlier than 30 days before your new program start date.Important
The transfer out request authorizes the OISS to release your SEVIS immigration record to the new school.
On the transfer release date, all work authorization connected to your Northwestern University SEVIS record will end. The responsibility of your SEVIS Record will be with your new school on your SEVIS Transfer Release date. Northwestern OISS staff no longer have access to your SEVIS record to make changes or process a new form I-20 or DS-2019.
HomeInternational StudentsSteps for Newly Admitted Students
Steps for Newly Admitted StudentsQuestions?
Send email to: intoff@northwestern.edu
Kellogg Master's students: Email for questions
Find Information on International Student Orientation
Newly admitted international students will follow these steps:

Admission – Congratulations on your admission! Set up your Northwestern NetID, password, and create your G-Suite email (Northwestern email address). See the Information Technology page and follow the links under "Incoming Students."
Tuition deposit – Pay your NU tuition deposit if a deposit is required by your academic program.Please note:
Undergraduate students are required to make a tuition deposit.
Master's and PhD programs in The Graduate School (TGS) do NOT require a tuition deposit. Students admitted to a program in  The Graduate School need only accept the admission offer.
Tuition deposits for Master's programs in other schools outside The Graduate School (for example McCormick, Kellogg, Pritzker, Medill, Bienen School of Music, etc.) VARY BY PROGRAM. Please contact your academic program to inquire if a tuition deposit is required.
If a tuition deposit is required, the amount due will appear on your Account in CAESAR. Please see the instructions to make a tuition deposit in CAESAR for more details.
Await notification of access to OISS Portal – Admitted students will be granted access to the OISS portal once the Northwestern Student Information System (CAESAR) transmits essential profile information over to the OISS. Your OISS profile includes biographic information, academic level, academic program to which you have been admitted, program dates, program costs, and other essential information. Please be patient as it generally takes at least two weeks from date of admission and receipt of tuition deposit for the systems to sync so that we may grant students access to the portal.  Upon receiving access to the portal, you will receive a system generated email sent to your NU email address. You will then be able to log in to the OISS Portal with your Net ID and password to request an immigration document.
Complete I-20/DS-2019 request – Follow the link in the email to log in to the OISS Portal to complete the questionnaires and upload required documents. Be sure to review Financial Document Requirements prior to submitting financial documentation. Transfer-in students should review the Transfer a SEVIS Record to NU resource with detailed instructions.
I-20/DS-2019 issued – Current processing time is 2 weeks from the time the request is completed and submitted. You will receive an email alerting you when your I-20/DS-2019 has been processed.
Access and print your I-20/DS-2019  Both F and J visa students will access the immigration document (I-20 or DS-2019) electronically via the OISS portal. You will need to print and sign the document in blue ink in the "Student Attestation" section of the document. You will receive an email alerting you when your I-20/DS-2019 has been processed and is available in the portal.
Complete the Online F-1/J-1 Student Orientation Course: See Online Orientation for F-1 & J-1 Students webpage for full details and instructions on how to access the course.
Pay SEVIS fee – Go to I-901 Fee website to pay your SEVIS fee
Schedule visa appointment - Canadian students do not need a visa; Canadian students skip steps 9 &10Learn more scheduling your visa appointment
Visa appointment – Attend visa appointment with required documents
F-1/J-1 visa issued – The US Consulate/Embassy will affix your F-1 or J-1 visa stamp in your passport
Travel to the United States - See Preparing for Arrival for additional information.
Complete all items on the Arrival Checklist for students - within 5 days of arrival.
Important Note:
New students should regularly check their Northwestern email address. All communications from OISS will be sent to the Northwestern email address only.

HomeInternational StudentsSteps for Newly Admitted StudentsImmigration Document Request
Immigration Document RequestThis page will help you understand the process to request a Form I-20 or DS-2019 Overview
In order to gain access to the OISS Portal  to request an immigration document (I-20 or DS-2019), admitted international students must confirm their planned attendance at Northwestern by paying the NU tuition  deposit (if required by your academic program).
Set up your Northwestern email account and check that email regularly.
Set up your Northwestern email account and check that email regularly.
Await email notification of access to the OISS Portal - Admitted students will be granted access to the OISS portal once the Northwestern Student Information System (CAESAR) transmits essential profile information over to the OISS. Your OISS profile includes biographic information, academic level, academic program to which you have been admitted, program dates, program costs, and other essential information. Please be patient as it generally takes at least two weeks from date of admission and receipt of tuition deposit for the systems to sync so that we may grant students access to the portal. This 2 week timeline assumes we have commenced the access cycle for your term of admission (see chart below).Please note: We will begin granting access to the OISS Portal for eligible admitted students based on term of admission as follows:
Fall term students
March 1


Winter term students
July 15


Spring term students
July 15


Summer term students
December 15




IMPORTANT: Please do not attempt to log in to the OISS Portal until after you have received the notification email. You will not have access to the OISS Portal until you receive the notification email. If you attempt to log in to the portal before CAESAR communicates with the OISS Portal and access is granted, you will receive an error message.
The link included in the  notification email will take you to the OISS Portal where you will now be able to log in with your Northwestern NetID and password. After logging in you will complete the questionnaires and upload required documentation to complete your Form I-20 or DS-2019  request.
There are two types of immigration documents you can request:



Form I-20
to apply for an F-1 student visa


Form DS-2019
to apply for a J-1 student visa
Form I-20
to apply for an F-1 student visa


Form DS-2019
to apply for a J-1 student visa



Note: It is possible to choose only 1 visa type. Please review Types of Student Visas to learn about the difference between an F-1 and J-1 visa.
When students are added to the  OISS portal, they are assigned a default visa type :   


Degree-seeking students: Any student participating in a degree-seeking program will be invited to the OISS portal as an F-1 student by default. Within the immigration document request, degree-seeking students are able to select their preferred visa type (F or J).  
Non-degree/Exchange students will gain access to portal with their visa type pre-selected as J-1, the required visa for non-degree and exchange students.
Please note:
The notification email is sent to an admitted student’s Northwestern email address. Therefore, it is essential that newly admitted international students have set up their NU email address and are checking it regularly. Typically, students activate their G-suite account for email as part of the NetID activation process. NU, including OISS, will use your Northwestern email address for ALL official communications. For more information, see @u.northwestern.edu Overview on the IT website.Required DocumentsYou will be required to provide the following documentation as part of your immigration document request:

Passport (biographical page only)
Northwestern admission or invitation letterAdmitted students will receive an official admission letter from the academic department or school that is either emailed or sent in the mail in hardcopy. Exchange programs typically issue an invitation letter.
Financial documentation
All new F-1 international students are required to show proof that funds are guaranteed for the first year of study.
All new J-1 international students are required to show proof that funds are guaranteed for the full length of his/her program.
More information on the types of acceptable funds and documentation
Transfer StudentsStudents transferring to Northwestern from another school in the United States will need to arrange to transfer their SEVIS record from the other school to Northwestern. See Transfer a SEVIS Record to NU for more information. Bringing DependentsYou may bring your dependents (spouse/ children) when you arrive or later. If your dependents will be traveling with you, they will need a dependent Form I-20 or DS 2019 to apply for an F-2 or J-2 visa. You can request your dependent immigration documents at the same time as yours.
You will need to provide additional financial documentation for dependents. Additional finances are required. Please see Visas for Spouses and Children for additional information and required financial documentation.Visa Appointment SchedulingYou will be able to schedule your appointment up to 365 days prior to the program start date listed on your Form I-20 or DS-2019.I-20 or DS-2019 ErrorsBe sure to review Understanding your Immigration Document as it explains specific details about the I-20/ DS-2019 components. 
If you find an error on your immigration document, contact the OISS immediately at intoff@northwestern.edu.
School Specific Contacts
Kellogg School of Management: Kellogg 1- & 2-Year MBA, MMM, MBAi and Kellogg Quarterly Exchange students should direct questions to international-advising@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Northwestern Law: All law students should direct questions to Amanda Hansen
 
Please allow 2 weeks after you have paid your NU admission deposit to receive the OISS email inviting you to apply for your immigration document. If you have not received the invitation email 2 weeks or more after paying your NU admission deposit, please send an email to intoff@northwestern.edu. Please include your full name, NetID, and term of admission.

HomeInternational StudentsSteps for Newly Admitted StudentsFinancial Documentation Requirements
Financial Documentation Requirements
All new F-1 international students are required to show proof that funds are guaranteed for the first year of study.
All new J-1 international students are required to show proof that funds are guaranteed for the full length of his/her program.
Please ensure that adequate funding will continue to be available from the same or equally dependable sources for subsequent years. You may be asked to show proof of this at your visa interview. This proof can come from several different sources (personal, family, university, business, etc.); however, you must be sure to have supporting documents for each of the sources of funding. 
Any combination of funds is acceptable, as long as you demonstrate you can cover the full cost of the program. 
Below are the requirements for each type of documentation. Keep in mind that although you are not required to submit original documents to Northwestern, you may be required to show ORIGINAL financial documents at your visa appointment, at the port of entry, or to USCIS if you are submitting a COS application.
Types of Funds

Personal Funds
Personal Funds

Bank statement, bank letter, or loan letter (see bank statement and letter guidelines below). An original is not required for I-20.DS-2019 issuance purposes but is strongly encouraged for the visa application.
Note: Student loans are considered to be Student Personal Funds. Proof of Student Loan funds (if applicable) should be included with the request.

Family or Friend Funds

Bank statement or bank letter dated within the last six months (see bank statement requirements below). An original is not required for I-20 or DS-2019 issuance purposes but is strongly encouraged for the visa application.
Sponsor Statement of Support: All sponsor names must be included on the I-20 or DS-2019 Request Form.

Northwestern University Funds
Northwestern University Funds

Copy of the letter from department/University detailing your financial aid award. If the award does not cover the total expense listed in the Financial & Program Information, you must show proof of funding that covers the remaining expenses.
NU Loans are considered a source of Personal Funds.

Employer, Government or Other Types of Funds

Support letter detailing the financial support (see sponsor letter of support requirements below).

 

Required Documentation Details
Bank Statement 

Must be dated within the last six months;
Name of account holder must be present;
Amount of money in the account must be listed;
Must be in English, or include a certified English translation;
Type of account (eg. savings, checking, time deposit) must be included;
Type of currency must be included.

Sponsor Letter of Support
Sponsor Letter of Support 

Must be an original;
Must be dated within the last six months;
Name of award recipient must be present;
Must state the period of time covered by the award;
Must indicate Northwestern as the student's institution (if being funded by Northwestern);
Must state the total amount of support for the given time period.

Bank Letter

Name of account holder must be present;
Exact amount of money in the account must be listed -OR- letter must state that the holder has enough money in the account to cover the estimated costs (with cost listed);
Must be in English, or include a certified English translation;
Type of account (eg. savings, checking, time deposit) must be included;
Type of currency must be included.
HomeInternational StudentsSteps for Newly Admitted StudentsTransfer a SEVIS Record to NU
Transfer a SEVIS Record to NUTransferring your F-1 or J-1 status to Northwestern University from another school in the U.S. requires several steps. Please carefully review the information below and follow the steps.show/hide allshow/hide allF-1 Students Transferring to NorthwesternF-1 International students are only considered "SEVIS transfer students" for immigration purposes if they are currently in valid F-1 status and no more than 5 months have passed from the last date of attendance OR the last day of OPT (whichever is later) to the start of classes.
The deadline for F-1 students to request a transfer is 60 days after the program completion or OPT end date, whichever is later.J-1 Students Transferring to NorthwesternJ-1 students who wish to transfer from their current program sponsor to Northwestern must consult with the International Student Advisor at the current school. To be eligible for a transfer, the J-1 category must remain the same, and the J-1 must request a transfer before the DS-2019 program end date.  In addition, to be eligible for a J-1, students must receive a majority of their financial support from sources other than personal funds and meet the following criteria:
Have adequate financial support for all school and living expenses, including additional financial support for any accompanying family members, for the duration of your degree program as determined by normative time.
51% of total financial support must come from an institutional or government sponsor in the form of a scholarship, fellowship, assistantship, stipend, tuition waiver, or other direct support provided specifically for the educational program.  Personal or family funds and loans or support from individuals do not qualify.
The deadline for J-1 students to transfer is the program completion date or the end of the Academic Training, whichever is later.
J-1 students cannot transfer during their 30-day grace period following completion. 
If the J-1 student plans to re-enter the US following the transfer, it is recommended that the J-1 student apply for a new J-1 visa with the new institution's DS-2019.  If the J-1 student remains in the U.S. between transfer institutions and does not leave the country, a new J-1 visa stamp is not required. If you are a newly admitted student in F-1 or J-1 visa status, you must transfer your SEVIS record to Northwestern if any of the following apply:
You are currently enrolled in a college, university, or high school in the U.S.;
You have recently graduated from a college, university, or high school in the U.S.;
You have completed or are completing a period of Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Academic Training (AT);
You are currently in valid F-1 or J-1 status, even if you are outside the U.S.
As a transfer F-1 student, do I need to pay the I-901 SEVIS fee again?
If you are a continuing student, who has maintained status and has not completed your program of study using the same SEVIS ID, do not pay the SEVIS I-901 fee.
If you are a continuing student, who has maintained status and is transferring or changing program levels using the same SEVIS ID, do not pay the SEVIS I-901 fee.
Read more on the DHS I-901 SEVIS Fee Frequently Asked Questions.
What are the steps to transfer my SEVIS record to Northwestern?
Notify the international student advisor at your current school that you intend to transfer to Northwestern University.The advisor will enter a SEVIS Release Date into your record. On this date, your SEVIS record will automatically transfer to Northwestern University. You will need to know the Northwestern SEVIS Code for your program at Northwestern (see section below with SEVIS Codes).
Confirm your planned attendance at NorthwesternIn order to begin the process of requesting an immigration document (I-20 or DS2019) from Northwestern University, admitted international students, including transfer students, must confirm their planned attendance at Northwestern by paying the NU tuition deposit (if required by your program).Generally, within 2 weeks of paying the NU tuition deposit and setting up NetID & NU email, admitted international students will be granted access to the OISS portal. Upon receiving access to the portal, you will receive a system-generated email sent to your NU email address. You can then log in to the OISS Portal with your Net ID and password to request an immigration document.The system-generated email is sent to an admitted student’s Northwestern email address. Therefore, newly admitted international students must set up their NU email address and are checking it regularly. Typically, students activate their G-suite account for email as part of
are checking it regularly. Typically, students activate their G-suite account for email as part of the NetID activation process. NU, including OISS, will use your northwestern email address for ALL official communications. For more information, see @u.northwestern.edu Overview on the IT website.
Complete the "Immigration Document Request" AND select the “SEVIS Transfer In” buttonThe link included in the email will take you through an easy process to confirm your address and other biographical details, submit financial documentation, and request immigration documents for dependents if applicable. Under the “Immigration Status” tab, select the "Transfer In" button if you are currently an F-1 or J-1 international student in the U.S. and need to transfer your SEVIS record to Northwestern University. You will need to provide:
Full name of your current institution




Transfer release date for your SEVIS record


Indicate the date your current institution will transfer your SEVIS record to Northwestern University.



Your most recent U.S. address
Even if you are not currently in the U.S., you must list your most recent U.S. address in order to transfer a SEVIS record.
Important Note:
You must complete and submit 2 requests in the OISS Portal: The "Immigration Document Request" and "SEVIS Transfer In Request"
Important Note about Timing & Receiving your I-20/DS-2019 from NorthwesternThe OISS will not be able to process your transfer in request and prepare your Form I-20/ DS-2019 until AFTER your current school has transferred your SEVIS record to Northwestern. Please allow 2 – 4 weeks after the date your SEVIS record is received by Northwestern to receive notification that your new I-20 or DS-2019 for study at Northwestern is ready.  You will be able to access and print your I-20 or DS-2019 from the OISS Portal. 
Who is my OISS Advisor at Northwestern?It is common for schools to require name and contact information for the advisor at the new school (Northwestern) to process your SEVIS record transfer. Please consult the Northwestern OISS Contact Our Office webpage to find your assigned advisor and contact information.SEVIS Transfer Deadlines
F-1 students: within 60 days of the program end date on the I-20 or within 60 days of the OPT end date.
J-1 students: by the program end date on the DS-2019.
Important Guidance for the summer between programsThis guidance applies to F-1 students who are ending an academic program at another U.S. institution (for example program ends in May or June)  and transferring to Northwestern to begin study in fall term :
When transferring from one U.S. institution to another, you can stay in the U.S. during the summer between the two programs.
During the transfer pending period (summer), you can travel outside the U.S. If your current F-1 visa is still valid, you can use it to re-enter the U.S. before the start date of your Northwestern University program begins, using the I-20 from Northwestern. (Note: Canadian students do not need a visa to enter the United States.)
Any on-campus employment benefit (at previous school) ends on the date indicated on your I-20 or date of transfer of your SEVIS record to the transfer-in school (Northwestern) - whichever date comes first. 
If you are on OPT from a previous degree program, selecting the SEVIS transfer release date during the approved OPT period will end your OPT work authorization. It is advisable to choose a release date that is after your OPT end date, UNLESS you are terminating employment early.
Traveling abroad between schools & your student visaTransfer students may travel and re-enter the U.S. at any time between school programs. However, transfer students must re-enter the U.S. with their Northwestern University I-20 or DS-2019 and not the previous school's document. 
F-1 students
F-1 students can use a valid (not expired) visa stamp issued for their pre-Northwestern institution to re-enter the U.S.
If the F-1 visa has expired, and you have plans to travel internationally, you must apply for a new F-1 visa at a U.S. embassy or consulate in your home country.

J-1 students

A J-1 student with plans to travel internationally and then re-enter the US after the transfer date must apply for a new J-1 visa with the DS-2019 from Northwestern (even if the current J-1 visa has not expired)
A J-1 student who remains in the U.S. for the time between transfer institutions does not need a new J-1 visa stamp. 
SEVIS School Codes for Northwestern University




 


SEVIS CODE


Campus & Program






F-1 Transfers


CHI214F01109000
 


Evanston Campus:
All undergraduate (Bachelor's) programs
Graduate programs at the following schools:
Bienen School of Music;
Kellogg School of Management (except for Master's in Management Studies students - MSMS);
McCormick School of Engineering & Applied Science;
Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications;
School of Communication;
School of Education & Social Policy;
Weinberg College of Arts & Sciences





F-1 Transfers 


CHI214F01109004


Chicago campus, for graduate programs at the following schools:

Feinberg School of Medicine
Pritzker School of Law
School of Professional Studies
Master's of Management Studies (MSMS) program in Kellogg School of Management





J-1 Transfers 


P-1-00213


For all undergraduate and graduate programs

HomeInternational StudentsSteps for Newly Admitted StudentsApply for a Visa Stamp
Apply for a Visa StampAdditional ResourcesPre-departure information:

Preparing for Arrival
EducationUSA's Pre-Departure Information
SEVIS Fee Payment

Consular resources:
Consular resources:

U.S. Embassies and Consulates Abroad
Visa Forms (DS-160)
Visa Wait Times
Pay the SEVIS Fee
Newly admitted students must pay a one-time SEVIS fee (also known as the I-901 fee) before they can apply for an F-1 or J-1 visa. Pay your SEVIS fee here.

The SEVIS fee is not a University fee, and it is in addition to any fees you might be required to pay at a U.S. consulate.  Dependent family members are not required to pay the fee.
Once the SEVIS fee has been paid, you will apply for a U.S. visa at a U.S. Embassy or Consulate outside of the U.S. The only exception is for Canadian citizens, who do not need an F-1 or J-1 stamp to enter the United States but who must still request an I-20/DS-2019 and pay the SEVIS fee.
Scheduling Your Appointment
For information on scheduling your visa appointment and to find the consulate or embassy nearest to you, visit the U.S. Consulates and Embassies Abroad website. Many consulates and embassies provide online appointment scheduling.
Visa processing times vary widely depending on the country and time of year, and some applications may undergo a rigid and time-consuming background check. If you are subject to a background check, there is little Northwestern can do to speed up the process. Therefore, we suggest scheduling your appointment as soon as you receive your I-20 or DS-2019, no sooner. Learn more about visa delay.
U.S. consulates and embassies can issue F-1 stamps up to 365 days prior to the start date listed on the I-20.  Unlike F-1 students, J exchange visitors are not subject to the 365 day limit on how long before their program begin date they may apply for a J visa.
Once you receive your visa, you may enter the US up to 30 days prior to the program start date.
Requesting an expedited visa appointment
U.S Consulates may be able to expedite your interview date to facilitate your arrival at the beginning of the academic term and for international student orientation. The process to request an expedited nonimmigrant visa interview varies by location. You should refer to the instructions on the website of the Embassy or Consulate Visa Section  where you will interview, or on their online appointment scheduling site. Please note:
You must first submit the online nonimmigrant visa application form (DS-160), pay the visa application processing fee, and schedule the first available interview appointment, even if that interview appointment is far into the future. Only at this point will a consular section consider your request for an expedited appointment.
Students and exchange visitors requesting expedited appointments should be prepared to provide an I-20 or DS-2019 form showing that they would miss the beginning of their courses/programs if not granted an expedited appointment.


How to Request an Expedited Interview provides additional information and guidance. 

Required Documents
The following items are required in support of your application for an F-1 or J-1 visa:
Non-Immigrant visa application DS-160
Valid I-20 or DS-2019 from Northwestern
Valid passport
SEVIS fee (I-901 fee) payment receipt.  Go to the I-901 fee website to pay your fee and print a receipt. If you have paid the I-901 fee, but choose to defer your enrollment, please note that the SEVIS fee can only be transferred for ONE CALENDAR YEAR. If you defer your I-20/ DS-2019 more than a year, you will have to pay the fee again. 
At least two passport-style photographs, taken recently (See the embassy web site for specifications)
Proof that you have permanent residence outside the U.S.
Current and original financial documentation.
A copy of the marriage certificate and/or birth certificate if your spouse and/or child are applying for the F-2/J-2 separately.

Please note that students admitted to multiple schools must decide which school to attend before applying for a visa stamp.
HomeInternational StudentsSteps for Newly Admitted StudentsVisa Delays
Visa DelaysProcessing times and delays vary by U.S. Consulate/Embassy. A vast majority of visas are issued within days of a visa interview/appointment. Anyone applying for a visa may be subjected to an administrative processing delay or background check that may take several weeks.
Please look at the information on the Department of State website for the embassy you are interested in to determine the standard processing times.
Our Office Can Help
If an administrative delay or background check postpones your intended arrival, please contact intoff@northwestern.edu.
Let us know your name, your student id, the location of the embassy, the date of your visa appointment and what they told you.
HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for Arrival
Preparing for ArrivalPrepare for your move by acquiring housing, necessary immunizations and health requirements, and more. Explore all of our pre-arrival resources. 
Before You Leave
Take the steps to obtain on-campus or off-campus housing and fulfilling health requirements, including getting immunizations and student health insurance. 

Explore housing options
Learn about immunization and health requirements
Fall 2024 housing move-in date and early arrival request (for undergraduate students)
The official housing move-in date for new first-year and transfer students is Tuesday, September 17, 2024. The Housing Early Arrival Program allows new first-year and transfer international students with a 2024-2025 housing contract the opportunity to move-in as early as September 15, 2024.  Please note International Wildcat Welcome programming will begin on September 16, 2024, so ideally new undergraduate international students will arrive on or by September 15th. 
Cost
The Early Arrival program is billed at a flat rate per night and is charged based on the number of days the student is on campus. For the 2024-2025 academic year, the flat rate is $50 per night for each night you arrive prior to the official move in date of September 17, 2024. The early arrival cost will be billed to the student account after the start of fall term.
How to request early arrival housing
How to request early arrival housing
Any student who desires Early Arrival housing must apply by completing an online form in the Housing Portal. Requests will be accepted beginning August 15, 2024, and the deadline to apply for Early Arrival housing is August 30, 2024.
More information
Review full information from Residential Services at Undergraduate Early Arrival Request Policy: Residential Services - Northwestern University.
Fall 2024 OISS sponsored airport shuttle
OISS will provide shuttle transportation from Chicago O'Hare Airport to the Evanston campus on September 15, 2024 only. There will be 3 shuttles throughout the day offered on a first come  first serve basis. Check back closer to the date for information on where to meet and the shuttle departure times.
Plan Your Arrival
Plan Your Arrival
F-1 and J-1 students may not arrive to the U.S. more than 30 days before the start date listed on the F-1 I-20 or the J-1 DS-2019.  This requirement, as well as the student check-in and orientation dates, will need to be considered when arranging travel. Lean more about:
Arrival, including inspection at the Port of Entry, and mandatory check-in
Travel to Northwestern University from local airports

Learn about immigration documents
Learn about student visas, the Form I-20 and DS-2019 before you arrive on the Understanding Immigration Documents resource section.
COVID-19 Vaccine - No longer required for most students
Northwestern announced on April 26, 2023 that it will no longer require the COVID-19 vaccination for most students. All related registration holds have been released. The COVID-19 vaccination will still be required for students in most clinical programs to comply with clinical site requirements. 
Upon Arrival
Within 5 days of arrival to the United States, new and transfer F-1 & J-1 students must complete the tasks outline on the Arrival Checklist for New Students.
HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for ArrivalHousing
HousingMore Information on Housing
Securing Housing Off-Campus 
How to Find Housing Brochure 
On-Campus Housing
Information about Northwestern Housing for students is available with Northwestern Residential Services.  

Graduate StudentsResidential services has three residence halls for graduate students. Find information about these residence halls, costs and the application. 
Undergraduate StudentsUndergraduate students are required to live in university housing for the first two years of their program. View the Residential Services Dates of Note page to learn about housing options for undergraduates, dates and deadlines.
Off-Campus Housing 
The university provides various resources through the office of Off-Campus Life to assist members of the Northwestern community in finding housing. See University resources for those seeking off-campus options. 
When applying for an apartment, a landlord may require an application fee and a credit check (which may require a Social Security number or ITIN), as well as proof of income. In addition, when signing a lease, a landlord may also require a deposit (usually equivalent to one month's rent) in addition to the first rent payment on the first day of the lease term. Landlords or apartment companies often ask international students to prove their immigration status and student status with a copy of the student’s I-20 or DS-2019 document. Students can provide copies of these documents when applying for off-campus housing.
HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for ArrivalStudent Health Requirements
Student Health RequirementsImmunization RequirementsNorthwestern students who are enrolled full time or half time in on-campus programs must meet University and State of Illinois immunization requirements no later than 30 days after their first term begins. Requirements differ based on program and the student's country of origin. Submission Steps
Identify your required immunizations and find your immunization form here.
Gather proof of your immunizations. Make sure the documents include your name.
 Visit https://www-healthy.nuhs.northwestern.edu/login_directory.aspx.
Enter your 7-digit student ID number
Select "Immunization Upload" from the list on the left to upload your proof of immunization and your completed program form.
Check your Northwestern email address for notification of any deficiencies and for confirmation that you’ve met the requirement.
Deadlines by term



Program Type and Term Start
Program Type and Term Start


Submission Deadline



Fall – Quarter, Semester, and Medical programs (MD, PT and Genetic Counseling)
July 1


Winter - Quarter
December 1


Spring - Quarter or Semester
March 15


Summer - Quarter or Semester
May 1


Transfer students/ off-cycle admits
30 days after acceptance
Penalties for non-complianceStudents who fail to submit their Student Immunization Form and record of immunizations, or fail to rectify ALL immunization deficiencies by 30 days after the start of classes will be barred from future class registration (including adding or changing classes) until compliant and will be assessed a non-refundable $100 late fee. PENALTIES ARE NOT ASSESSED PRIOR TO THE START OF CLASSES.Questions?If you have questions concerning the Student Immunization Form, immunization requirements, immunizations, or related issues, please review the Immunization Requirement Frequently Asked Questions. You can also email hims@northwestern.edu or call at 847-491-2117.Student Health InsuranceNorthwestern University requires all degree-seeking international students — students holding a J-1 or F-1 U.S. visa — to confirm their annual Northwestern University Student Health Insurance Plan (NU-SHIP) enrollment, and maintain coverage in the NU-SHIP, for the entire time they are
(NU-SHIP) enrollment, and maintain coverage in the NU-SHIP, for the entire time they are studying at Northwestern. Enrollment DetailsInternational students are encouraged to confirm their NU-SHIP enrollment as soon as possible in the open enrollment period — July 1 through Oct. 1 (for most students) — to ensure they have access to plan benefits and services as soon as the plan year begins on Sept. 1. Login to CAESAR to confirm your NU-SHIP enrollment. Please review the screenshot guide for assistance on how to confirm your enrollment.
Penalties for not fulfilling health requirements include a hold on subsequent registration and a non-refundable $100 late fee. 
The NU-SHIP premium will be billed to your student account following your tuition posting. Student Health Insurance ID CardDownload/print your Student Health Insurance ID Card: It typically takes five business days from when you confirm online in CAESAR or submit a manual enrollment form to the Student Insurance Office, for Aetna to generate your ID card. Please visit www.aetnastudenthealth.com/northwestern, and click on the “Get Your ID Card” to download a copy of your ID card. More informationVisit the NU-SHIP webpage for full details.
Student Health Insurance Documents and FAQs
2022-23 NU-SHIP Pamphlet
2022-23 NU-SHIP Plan Design & Benefits Summary
2022-23 NU-SHIP Summary of Benefits & Coverage
2023-24 NU SHIP Pamphlet
2023-24 NU-SHIP Plan Design & Benefits Summary
2023-24 NU-SHIP Summary of Benefits & Coverage

For more information, please visit the NU Student Health Insurance website or email questions to student.insurance@northwestern.edu.

HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for ArrivalTravel to Northwestern
Travel to NorthwesternLocal Airports
You may fly into either of the area's two major airports. For additional information about your arrival, visit their websites. 

O'Hare International Airport is approximately an hour from Northwestern's Evanston campus (depending on your mode of transportation) 
Midway International Airport is slightly farther and may take longer.
Getting to Campus
There are several options for getting from the airport to campus, depending on time, budget, and desired mode of transportation.
 
Airport Express 
Airport Express provides shared rides from the airport to campus.  

Reserve your spot online AT LEAST 24 hours before your flight. 
Northwestern University students will receive a 15%  discount when booking online.  

American Coach Limousine 

Provides chauffeured transportation services. 
Go to American Coach Airport Transfers to calculate price and make a reservation.   

Taxi & Rideshare  
Taxi service is available to city of Chicago and suburban destinations. Fares vary based on traffic conditions, but an average fare from O'Hare International Airport to the Evanston campus is $50-$75. All taxis should have a working meter to calculate the fare based on time and mileage. Some taxi companies have airport “flat” (fixed) rates. Be sure to ask.
Taxi stands are situated at the lower-level curb front outside of baggage claim at each terminal. 


Use the taxi stands to ensure you have a licensed taxi driver. Do not accept rides from drivers outside the taxi stand or on the departure level (second level) of the terminal roadways. 

Rideshares through the Uber and Lyft applications are widely available from both airports. Uber and Lyft drivers are authorized to pick up riders at O'Hare and Midway airports.  Please open your app and follow the directions to the designated pickup zones.  Both airports offer 30 minutes of free Wi-Fi, so you can use this to order an Uber/Lyft ride! 
Car Rental 
Some new students and their parents choose to rent cars.  Please check individual car company websites for pricing, driver's license requirements and additional information. 

Rental car companies at O'Hare 
Rental car companies at Midway
Rental car companies at O'Hare 
Rental car companies at Midway 

Public Transit
The following public transportation options are more economical but can be more complicated and will take longer to arrive. 

Pace Bus  is a suburban public bus system. This takes approximately one hour to travel to campus. Cost is $2.25. 

After arrival, take the Airport Transit System from your terminal to O'Hare's long-term parking lot E. Then get on Pace Bus 250 (Dempster St), which drops off at the CTA Davis station in Evanston. 


CTA (Chicago Transit Authority) Trains can be taken from O'Hare International Airport. Taking the blue line and then making two transfers to the red line and purple line will bring you to Evanston. This takes approximately 90 minutes to two hours, depending on the time of day. Cost is between $5 - $10 depending on the timing of transfers.
The CTA blue line station is situated on the lower level of Terminal 2. You may walk to the station or use the Airport Transit System to get to the station.
Take the blue line train and switch to the red line at the Jackson Station in downtown Chicago. From Jackson, take the red line in the direction of Howard, and then at Howard, switch to the purple line (direction of Linden) and the purple line will bring you to Evanston. 
For best routes and guidance, use your map app and switch to “public transportation” directions.
HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for ArrivalPort of Entry, Arrival and Check-in
Port of Entry, Arrival and Check-inUseful LinksTravel to Northwestern
Orientation
Arrival Checklist
I-94 Record
OISS Portal Plan your Arrival
F-1 and J-1 students may not arrive to the U.S. more than 30 days before the start date listed on the F-1 I-20 or the J-1 DS-2019.  If you decide to come earlier than this, you will enter as a tourist and must leave the United States so that you may re-enter in the correct F-1 or J-1 status no more than 30 days before the start date listed on your immigration document.
Before you plan your arrival date and make travel plans, be sure that you are aware of your required international student orientation dates, program orientation date for graduate students, or Wildcat Welcome dates for undergraduate students.
Inspection at a U.S. Port of Entry
Upon inspection at a U.S. Port of Entry, the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer will ask for these documents:
Northwestern-issued I-20 or DS-2019;
A valid passport valid six-months into the future (students with passport countries listed here do not need a passport valid six-months into the future);


A valid F-1 or J-1 visa stamp (Canadians do not obtain an F-1 or J-1 visa);
Your SEVIS I-901 fee payment receipt;
You may be asked for your Northwestern letter of admission
Keep these documents with you during your travel. Be prepared to present these documents to CBP upon arrival. If you are traveling by airplane, you will present these documents for inspection before you have access to your larger checked luggage so please keep these documents in your carry-on items during your flight.
I-94 Arrival Record
The I-94 is your official arrival record to record your entry to the U.S., your immigration (visa) category, and your approved length of stay. The OISS recommends that you retrieve and check your I-94 arrival record every time you re-enter the U.S. In most cases, I-94 entry records are only issued electronically. Many U.S. Ports of Entry no longer issue entry stamps as well.
Visit the CBP I-94 website to retrieve your I-94.
Check your I-94 for accuracy including these details:

Admission date (the date your arrived to the U.S.)
Visa status
Personal information
Admission date (the date your arrived to the U.S.)
Visa status
Personal information

See our resource on the I-94 Record for additional information including how to correct a mistake on your I-94 Record.
Upon Arrival to Northwestern:Complete online student check-in
International Student check-in is required to activate your SEVIS record. All international students in F or J status must check-in through the OISS Portal within 5 days of arrival to the U.S.  Additional instructions and other "upon arrival" required tasks can be found on the Arrival Checklist for New Students page.
HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for ArrivalArrival Checklist for New Students
Arrival Checklist for New StudentsUpon arrival, new F-1 and J-1 international students are required to complete the tasks on this page within 5 days. Obtain your I-94 record online
Travel in and out of the U.S. is recorded electronically by Customs and Border Protection (CBP) through the I-94 Arrival/Departure Record for all international non-immigrant visitors to the U.S. This important record lists your entry date, port of entry, and visa status in which you were admitted to the U.S. The I-94 record may be required as proof of status for F-1 or J-1 benefit applications, employment verification, and other official purposes.  You will be required to submit an electronic copy of your I-94 record as part of the OISS immigration check in process.  Learn more and access your I-94 RecordVerify that you have completed (100%) of the required Online F-1/J-1 Student Orientation course.Hopefully, all new students will have completed the required online orientation course prior to arrival to Northwestern. If you have not enrolled in and completed or still need to complete sections of the course, please do so as soon as possible! The "Certificate of Completion" of this
sections of the course, please do so as soon as possible! The "Certificate of Completion" of this course will be required to complete immigration check-in with OISS.
Learn more and access the required online orientation course:
F-1/J-1 REQUIRED ONLINE ORIENTATIONComplete Student Check-InAll students who have entered the U.S. using an initial or transferred SEVIS ID are required to complete "Check-in" via the OISS portal, including:
Newly admitted students arriving from abroad.
Newly admitted transfer students arriving from elsewhere in the U.S.
Students returning from a leave of absence of more than 5 months.

Instructions to submit your “Check-in Request”
Login to the OISS Portal with your NetID and password.
Click on the “Documents and Requests” tab in your student profile.
On the right side, you will see a “Check-in Request.” Click on that icon and complete and submit the request with the required documentation. The preferred format to upload is PDF or JPEG. If we cannot open your document, you will be required to re-submit in the required format.
Upload a copy of your I-94 arrival record (see above)
Upload a copy of your I-94 arrival record (see above)
Upload the "Certificate of Completion" to demonstrate you have completed the required online F-1/J-1 student orientation course. Upon successful completion of the orientation course, the certificate of completion will be sent to you via email at the email address you used to create your Homebase account. Note: Kellogg School of Management master’s level and exchange students; GLO exchange students; and NU-Q exchange students will not complete this course and should upload documentation from their respective areas. More information can be found on the online F-1/J-1 student orientation course webpage.
Upload a copy of your F-1 or J-1 visa page from your passport* *This visa page contains your name, passport number, date of birth, visa issuance and expiration dates, etc.Note: Canadians citizens do not receive an F-1 or J-1 visa and should instead upload a copy of the I-20 or DS-2019 in this section.
See Understanding Immigration Documents to learn more about your visa.Update your U.S. address in CAESARGo to the CAESAR login page and login using your NetID and password - Click on the “Profile” box - Then click on the “Addresses” link in the left hand menu and enter your current U.S. address. - See Add or Update Address for step by step images and instructions.
Current (U.S.) address 
Your current address must be a US address. List the address where you are living while attending courses at Northwestern University. The current U.S. address should never be a non-US address.    Please be aware that a very specific format is used for writing addresses in the US, which may differ from how addresses are written in your home country.  
Failure to write your US address in the correct format can cause it to be invalid, and therefore it will not be considered updated. Please ensure that your current (US) address follows the guidelines and format as shown below:
Country must be United States 
Address 1 must be the building number first, followed by the street name (never include the name of your apartment or dorm building in the address) 
Address 2 is optional and should be used for an apartment, dorm, or floor number
Important note
OISS cannot activate or validate your immigration record until you have updated your US Address in CAESAR. Even if you are living in a temporary location, enter that address and then update when you move. Throughout your studies at Northwestern in F-1 or J-1 student visa status, you must always update your address in CAESAR within 10 days of moving.
Permanent (non-US) address 
Your permanent address must be a non-US address, most likely your address in your home country, before arriving in the US. This should never be a US address.  
 Update  your emergency contact in CAESARDuring your studies at Northwestern, you are required to keep an emergency contact updated with the university. Emergency contacts should be updated in CAESAR. If you are unsure how to update this information, please use these instructions for emergency contact updates.
Update your U.S. phone number in the OISS PortalDuring your studies at Northwestern, you are required to have at least one phone number updated with OISS.    Follow these steps:
Login to the OISS Portal with your NetID and password.
Click on the “Documents and Requests” tab in your student profile.
Select the “Contact Information Update” request.
F-1 Students
You may update the U.S. Phone Number and/or Foreign Phone Number (and Foreign Country Code). If you do not have a phone number, you may check the "No phone numbers" box.
J-1 Students
J-1 Students
You must update the US Phone Number. If you do not have a US phone number, you may use the US phone number of a friend, relative, or your academic department. If you are participating in an exchange program, the US phone number field may already be updated with the phone number of your exchange program. Please check in the Personal & Programs tab.Attend International Student OrientationInternational Student Orientation is an opportunity for students to learn about Northwestern — including meeting their OISS Advisor, learning about immigration requirements, preparing for the academic year, and making connections with other international students. We offer two separate programs in the fall term that are specific to the academic level: International Wildcat Welcome for undergraduate (bachelor's) level students and GISO for graduate (master's and PhD) level students.
Students arriving to begin studies in Winter, Spring or Summer terms
Students arriving to begin studies in Winter, Spring or Summer terms
OISS will provide virtual orientation for students arriving to begin studies at Northwestern in Winter, Spring or Summer terms. Additional tasks to complete soon after arrival if you have not alreadyGet your Northwestern WILDCARDA Wildcard is your student ID card. Submit your photo online and learn more from the Wildcard Office.Print and save your Northwestern University Student Health Insurance CardGo to https://www.aetnastudenthealth.com/en/school/812845/index.html and click on "Get your ID Card" to download a copy of your health insurance ID card.Submit required immunization and health records to Health Services.See Health Services Immunization Requirements for full details and a link to upload your immunization records.
HomeInternational StudentsOrientation
OrientationInternational Student Orientation is an opportunity for students to learn about Northwestern — including meeting their OISS Advisor, learning about immigration requirements, preparing for the academic year, and making connections with other international students. We offer two separate programs in fall term that are specific to academic level: International Wildcat Welcome for undergraduate (bachelor's) level students and GISO for graduate (master's and PhD) level students.Online Course: Orientation for F-1 & J-1 studentsPlease see Online Orientation for F-1 & J-1 Students for full details about the course including who is required to complete the course, recommended timing, and instructions on how to access the course. Fall 2024 OrientationGraduate International Student Orientation (GISO) Dates and details for Fall 2024 GISO will be available closer to the start of Fall 2024.
More information on GISOInternational Wildcat Welcome Dates and details for Fall 2024 International Wildcat Welcome (for undergraduate students) will be available closer to the start of the fall term.
More information on International wildcat welcomeTravel to campusThere are several options for transportation from Chicago O'Hare International Airport to Northwestern's campus. See Travel to Northwestern for more information.
HomeInternational StudentsOrientationGraduate International Student Orientation
Graduate International Student OrientationF-1/J-1 Student Orientation online courseAll new graduate students are required to complete an online orientation course. Please see Online Orientation for F-1 & J-1 Students for complete details on how to access the required online course. 2024 Fall Term Graduate International Student Orientation (GISO)New graduate students arriving for Fall 2024 will participate in both a required pre-arrival online F-1/J-1 Student Orientation course and in-person international orientation programs and activities designed for graduate students (GISO). Dates and additional details of Fall 2024 GISO will be available as the term gets closer. Please check back.
Fall term GISO (held in September) is designed to help new graduate international students acclimate to life at Northwestern. You will meet your OISS advisor, review important immigration requirements, tour both the Evanston and Chicago campuses, and have the opportunity to participate in social activities.Travel planning
Review the Travel to Northwestern webpage for guidance on local airports and arrival to campus.
All F-1 and J-1 with an initial I-20 or DS-2019, including transfer students, are permitted to enter the United States 30 days before the program start date listed on their documents. 
Find your way  around campusNavigate CampusNavigate campus with an interactive or printable map of Northwestern University - both Evanston and Chicago campuses.Navigate CampusInternational student guide to evanston campus and surrounding areasUse this QR Code to link to locations both on and near the Evanston campus that will be useful in your initial days.international students' guide to evanston campus
HomeInternational StudentsOrientationInternational Wildcat Welcome
F-1/J-1 Student Orientation (online required course)All new undergraduate students are required to complete an online orientation course. 
Please see Online Orientation for F-1 & J-1 Students for complete details on how to access the required online course. 2024 Fall Term International Wildcat WelcomeNew undergraduate students arriving for Fall 2024 will participate in both a required pre-arrival orientation course and in-person "International Wildcat Welcome" programs and activities designed for undergraduate students (ISO).Dates and additional details of Fall 2024 International Wildcat Welcome will be available as the term gets closer. Please check back.2024 Fall Term on-campus housing move in date and early arrival requestPlease see the Preparing for Arrival section for dates, costs and instruction on how to apply for early move-in. Travel Planning
Review the Travel to Northwestern webpage for guidance on local airports and transportation to campus.
All F-1 and J-1 with an initial I-20 or DS-2019, including transfer students, are permitted to enter the United States 30 days before the program start date listed on their documents. 
Find your way around Evanston campusNavigate CampusNavigate campus with an interactive or printable map of Northwestern University.Northwestern MapsInternational Student Guide to Evanston Campus and Surrounding areasUse this QR Code to link to locations both on and near campus that will be useful in your initial days on campus.International Students' Guide to Evanston Campus
HomeInternational StudentsOrientationOnline Orientation for F-1 & J-1 Students
Online Orientation for F-1 & J-1 StudentsThe online orientation course is specifically designed for new and transfer international students. The easy-to-use online platform provides essential information to help you feel more prepared and confident in your travels and arrival to Northwestern University. The course covers various key topics including immigration requirements and maintaining your F-1 or J-1 status, travel preparation, what to expect upon arrival, life on campus, information about Evanston and Chicago, student employment and much more. We have tailored this online course to address common questions received from international students who are within a few months of starting their studies at Northwestern University.Who should participate in the F-1/J-1 Required Orientation Course?This is a required course for all F-1 and J-1 students (all academic levels) EXCEPT FOR:
Master's level and exchange students in the Kellogg School of Management
J-1 Global Learning Office (GLO) exchange students
Northwestern University in Qatar (NU-Q) exchange students
If you fall into one of these exceptions, you will receive orientation information directly from the Kellogg International team, GLO, or NU-Q.When should I complete the online orientation?We strongly advise you complete all sections PRIOR to your arrival in the United States. We'll be monitoring completion rates and the time spent on the course by each student.
Upon successful completion (100%) of your F-1/J-1 Student Orientation course, you will receive a Certificate of Completion. This certificate will be required to complete your Immigration check-in with OISS after your arrival to campus. Read more about Check-in on the New Student Arrival Checklist.How can I access the F-1/J-1 Student Orientation course?Accessing the F-1/J-1 online orientation is easy. The course is delivered via the Homebase platform which OISS will use to deliver additional information throughout your time at Northwestern. Be sure to make note of your Homebase login  and password so that you can return to Homebase in the future.
To create a Homebase account & access the orientation course:
Go to the Homebase Create Account page to access this course.
You will need to enter basic biographical information and create a password.
Be sure to make note of the email used and the password you set so that you can return to Homebase as needed.
Click the blue "Create Account" button at the bottom.
Begin the F-1/J-1 Student Orientation course.

 If you have any issues accessing the course, please email: intoff@northwestern.edu

HomeInternational StudentsStudent Employment
Student EmploymentEmployment OptionsF-1 Students
On-campus employment
CPT (during your academic program)
OPT (after your academic program)
STEM OPT (OPT for students in the STEM field)
J-1 students
On-campus employment
Academic Training (during/after your academic program)
Job Search Resources and Help
Northwestern Student Job Board (Click on "Job Board" for listing of currently available on-campus jobs). Please note F-1 and J-1 students are not eligible for jobs identified as "Federal Work-Study."
International Student Career Planning Guide
All students: Northwestern Career Advancement (contact your career advisor based on your school)
All students: Chicago Field Studies academic internship program 
McCormick students: Engineering Career Development
Medill students:

IMC
Undergraduate Journalism
Graduate Journalism
Alumni


Communication students: EPICS
For Employers
What Employers Should Know

HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentOn-Campus Employment
On-Campus EmploymentF-1 On-Campus EmploymentJ-1 On-Campus EmploymentF-1 On-Campus EmploymentOpenCloseF-1 students can work on-campus without authorization, according to the following requirements.
You are not eligible for any campus jobs classified as work-study positions.
You may work a maximum of 20 hours per week while school is in session and full-time during break and vacation periods. 
You will need a social security number to work on campus. See the steps to apply for a social security number.
See the New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals for steps F-1 & J-1 students need to complete upon obtaining an on-campus job.

Finding On-Campus Employment
The following webpages provide student employment postings; student jobs are also advertised at various locations on campus.
Northwestern Student Employment (click on "Job Board" for current jobs available)
The Graduate School
University Dining Services
University Library
University Career Services
Athletics (tutor student-athletes)
J-1 On-Campus EmploymentOpenCloseOn-campus employment for J-1 students is limited to 20-hours per week when class in in-session. However, these 20 total hours can be split between different types of employment, if authorized.

Full-time employment is allowed during official school breaks and annual vacation (i.e. summer quarter).
You will need a social security number to work on campus. See the steps to apply for a social security number.
See the New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals for steps F-1 & J-1 students need to complete upon obtaining an on-campus job.
How to Request Approval for On-Campus Employment
To apply for on-campus employment authorization, you must submit the Student On-Campus Employment Request in the OISS Portal in the current students tab.
Any J-1 student not currently sponsored by Northwestern (i.e. Fulbright) must contact their sponsoring agency for the required employment authorization.
Authorization Expiration and Renewal
The On-Campus Employment Request in the OISS Portal will specify the period of time for which on-campus work has been authorized. Authorization can be granted for periods of up to 12-months at a time or for shorter periods.
In order to begin new period of employment, or to continue previously authorized employment (for which the form expiration date has been reached), you must complete a new request.
Reporting Employment Changes
You must submit a new J-1 Student On-Campus Employment Authorization Form to report any of the following:
Change in current employment (i.e. change in the number of hours per week);


Change in type of employment or employer;


Change in location of employment; and/or


Early completion and/or cancellation of student employment.


Finding On-Campus Employment
The following webpages provide student employment postings; student jobs are also advertised at various locations on campus.

Northwestern Student Employment (click on "Job Board" for current jobs available)
The Graduate School
University Dining Services
University Library
University Career Services
Athletics (tutor student-athletes)

HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentCPT for F-1 Students
Curricular Practical TrainingCurricular Practical Training (CPT) is temporary work authorization required for any off-campus work during an F-1 student’s academic program.
Off-campus work includes an internship, practicum, freelance work, cooperative, job, gig/performance, (non-charitable) volunteer work, performance. Job shadowing or informational interviews do not require CPT. Organized externship opportunities should be reviewed to determine whether CPT is required.  
CPT is required for paid and unpaid positions.  
CPT must be authorized before a student can begin working. Students will receive a new I-20 with the CPT listed on the second page.  Students working without CPT authorization are considered in violation of F-1 status and should contact their OISS advisor immediately. 
The CPT start date should be at least two weeks after the submission date of the CPT Request in the OISS Portal. If a student enters a start date that occurs before the CPT I-20 is issued, the start date will be changed to the date that the CPT I-20 is issued. Students are not authorized to begin CPT employment until the approved CPT I-20 has been issued.
Details and RequirementsQualifying for CPTTo be eligible for CPT, you must meet the following criteria:
Completed one full academic year: 3 quarters, 2 semesters, or 3 trimesters at Northwestern University, or at another SEVP-approved higher education institution in the U.S.




A transcript or I-20 showing one academic year of full-time enrollment may be required.


Graduate students that have not completed one full academic year are not eligible for CPT unless the CPT internship/job opportunity is required by the graduate program within the first year.




CPT must be an integral part of the major program of study (as listed on the I-20 as Major 1 or Major 2) and related to a specific course. This is determined by an academic advisor, program director, dean or PI. As part of the CPT application process, the academic advisor (or similar academic authority figure) must certify that the job is directly related to a student’s major and to a specific course.   
Registered for an academic course directly related to the CPT internship.
If CPT is requested during the academic year (Fall, Winter and/or Spring terms), a student must be enrolled in the relevant course during the term in which the employment takes place.  


If CPT is requested for the summer term, a student can be enrolled for the relevant course during summer term or could be enrolled for the relevant course the previous (Spring) or following (Fall) term.    


The CPT course is not required to be an internship/co-op course, unless otherwise required by the academic program.  


The student must enroll in a CPT approved course for each approved CPT authorization. 




Not on academic probation. 
CPT RequirementsCPT is authorized as either part-time (20 hours/week or less) or full-time (over 20 hours/week).  

Students should not engage in 12 months or more of full-time CPT if they are interested in applying for the 12-month Post-Completion OPT period. 

CPT is authorized on a quarter/semester basis.
CPT is authorized on a quarter/semester basis.

Dates of employment must fall within the academic term of authorization or up to 2 weeks into either adjacent term. Any extensions beyond this period require another CPT request.  
Doctoral students may be authorized for up to one academic year of CPT. 

Students are not authorized to work until the CPT authorization is approved and a new CPT I-20 is received. 
Coursework and CPT

Students who are authorized for a medical or academic difficulty reduced course load (RCL) do not qualify for CPT during the RCL term.  
Students who are authorized for a final term RCL may apply for CPT if they meet the eligibility requirements. 
An I-20 extension will not be granted for the sole purpose of obtaining a CPT opportunity.   
Students may work on-campus and on CPT at the same time, but remember academic coursework and commitments are top priority! 

Remote work
Remote work 

CPT is required for remote work from within the U.S. for a U.S. employer. 
CPT is not required for remote work from within the U.S. for an international employer. Students should consult with their employer and an international tax attorney to confirm payment and tax implications.  
CPT will not be authorized for work completed from outside of the U.S. Students should consult with their employer and an international tax attorney to confirm payment and tax implications.  
How to Apply for CPT 
Secure internship/job and obtain a job offer letter. The job offer letter should contain: 

Start and end dates of the job. Please note: The start date must be at least 5-10 business days into the future on the offer letter as we cannot back-date CPT authorization.
Name of employer
Full U.S. address of employer
Approximate number of hours per week the student will work
Submit your CPT request in the OISS Portal. 
The CPT authorization request is sent to the person you specified as your “academic advisor” -your academic advisor/program director/PI/dean.  (See the instructions in the CPT request for more information). Your recommender certifies: 

You are making academic progress. 
This CPT opportunity is directly related to your major area of study. 
This CPT opportunity is directly related to an academic course you are currently enrolled in/will enroll in.
The CPT opportunity is integral to or required for your program of study.
You should discuss this request with your academic advisor (not your OISS advisor) before completing the CPT request in the portal. We cannot process the CPT request until the electronic recommendation from your academic advisor has been received.
Your OISS advisor begins processing your CPT authorization once your request is in “Submitted” status in the OISS Portal.  Your OISS Advisor will issue you an updated I-20 with your CPT Approval and travel signature on page 2 of the I-20.  This process takes up to 5 business days from the time we receive a “submitted” status CPT request. You can check the status of your CPT request in your OISS Portal Profile. 
Important Note: Students may track the status of a CPT Request in the OISS Portal. If your application remains in “APPROVER REVIEW” status beyond 3 business days, please contact your OISS Advisor for support. 
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with CPT authorization:
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with CPT authorization: 
You will receive an email notifying you when your updated I-20 with CPT authorization has been processed and is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. You will then be able to print your updated I-20 from your “Documents” section of the OISS Portal. You will need to sign in ink in the student attestation section of the document.
Important
If a student decides not to participate or if there are any changes to an already approved CPT authorization, the student is required to submit an Edit/Change CPT Authorization request in the OISS Portal.  

If a student is confirmed to have not enrolled in a CPT course after the CPT was approved and it ended, the student is considered in violation of F-1 status. Student should contact their OISS advisor immediately. 
If the start date of the approved CPT has passed, the student must provide a letter on employer’s company letterhead confirming the correct employment dates or confirm the student did not perform any work. Students should contact their OISS advisor. 

It is essential that the SEVIS record is accurate. A student's work authorization for CPT must be cancelled or removed if it does not occur.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentAcademic Training for J-1 Students
Academic Training for J-1 StudentsAcademic Training (AT) is employment authorization allowing J-1 students to gain practical experience that is directly related to their academic program of study. AT may include, but is not limited to, internships, practicum, cooperative education, and other types of practical experience gained through off-campus employment.
AT may be authorized before the completion of an academic program, but it is generally used after the completion of an academic program. AT done prior to program completion is deducted from the total amount available upon completion.
AT is awarded on a full-time basis—part-time employment is not deducted at a half-time rate.
You must receive authorization from the OISS before beginning employment.
EligibilityConditions of AT
Undergraduate and graduate J-1 students are eligible for up to eighteen months of AT. 
Any student (graduate or undergraduate) in a program less-than eighteen months may be eligible for a period of AT equivalent to the length time spent in a full-time course of study in the U.S. (i.e. a nine month academic program equates to nine months of AT.)
Doctoral students are eligible for two 18-month periods of AT. However; the second period is only awarded once the PhD has been completed.
A student must apply for AT prior to the expiration of the DS-2019 or prior to the completion of the academic program, whichever is earlier.
It is the responsibility of the student to maintain a valid DS-2019 for the duration of the AT period. If an extension is needed, contact the OISS. Plan ahead!
Post-Completion AT must be paid employment, or you must provide proof of sufficient funds to support yourself during the training period.
Your authorized period of academic training will begin on the day after you complete your studies, whether or not you begin working on this day. 
Are you eligible?
Student must be in good academic standing.
Student must be maintaining J-1 status (including maintaining adequate health insurance, as stipulated by the U.S. Dept of State—see p. 2 of Form DS-2019).
AT employment must be directly related to academic program of study.
Student must have an offer of employment.
Student must have an offer of employment.
How to Apply1. Obtain an offer letter from your prospective employer.The letter must include all of the following: (Sample Employment Offer Letter)
Job title
Brief description of employment
Start and end dates of employment
Address of location of employment
Salary (required for Post-Completion Academic Training only)
Number of hours to be worked per week
Name, address, phone number, and e-mail of direct supervisor
2. Complete the "Student Academic Training (AT)" request via the OISS Portal.Access the OISS Portal and go to the Documents & Requests section. Select, complete and submit the Academic Training request.
The request will ask for your academic department approver’s information. They will receive an email to approve. Once approved, the request will come to the OISS and it will be processed in 3 business days. 3. When to ApplyStudents applying for pre-completion AT must apply prior to the start-date of their employment. Any student working off-campus before receiving authorization is in violation of their immigration status. All applications for AT require an offer letter and a completed application in order to be authorized.
A student must apply for AT before the expiration date listed on the DS-2019 or prior to the completion of the academic program, whichever is earlier.
Completed applications generally require 3-4 days to process. Plan ahead!
NOTE: PhD students who have completed their programs, and who are currently working in the first 18-month period of AT should apply for the second period of 18-months at least 30-days prior to the end-date of the first 18-month period.Additional RequirementsTravel
Travel outside the U.S. before the completion of the academic program at Northwestern requires a valid passport (six-months into the future), valid J-1 visa stamp, and valid DS-2019.
Travel outside the U.S. after completion of the academic program requires a completed AT application and approval prior to departure. Plan ahead and contact the OISS if you require assistance.
Responding to Changes in EmploymentIf you wish to change your job/employer, you must complete the entire application procedures outlined above, prior to terminating the already authorized employment, and before beginning the new employment.
If your employment is terminated unexpectedly, your authorization is terminated as well. In this instance, you are required to either leave the U.S. or change your status within 30-days of termination.
Consult the OISS immediately if there are changes in your employment or for any additional questions.Employment Resources for AT StudentsSocial Security Number (SSN)In order to be paid, you are required to provide your employer with a SSN. Visit our Social Security page for more information about applying for an SSN.Social Security TaxesAs a J-1 student you are exempt from paying Social Security (F.I.C.A.) taxes as long as you remain a "non-resident alien" for tax purposes (see Internal Revenue Service Publication 519, "U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens").Federal, State, and Local TaxesUnless you qualify under a tax treaty between the U.S. and your home country government, your earnings as a J-1 student will be subject to applicable to U.S. federal, state and local taxes, and employers are required by law to withhold those taxes from your paycheck. You are required to file a U.S. federal income tax return by April 15 of the year following the year in which you were employed.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentOPT for F-1 Students
F-1 Optional Practical Training (OPT)Optional Practical Training (OPT) is a 12-month work authorization available to F-1 international students who have been full-time students for at least one academic year and plan to seek employment in the United States in their fields of study.   Looking for information about the 24-month STEM OPT Extension? Go to the STEM OPT Extension page.The BasicsOPT is a benefit of a student’s F-1 status. Students generally apply for OPT in their last academic term.EligibilityTo be eligible for OPT, you must...

be in F-1 status at the time of OPT application.
be a full-time student for at least one academic year. 
be completing your program of study at Northwestern University.
Not have used more than 1 year of full-time CPT during your current degree level.
OPT is available once per academic level.
If you applied for OPT at the same academic level previously, but did not use your full 12 months of OPT at that time, please contact your OISS advisor to discuss your options.
Do I need a job offer before applying for OPT?No, a job offer is not required to apply for OPT. However, during the 12-month OPT period, you will be allowed only a cumulative total of 90 days of unemployment.  You must also report your employment in the SEVP Portal or the OISS Portal under the “alumni” tab. See Rules and Reporting Requirements while on OPT for more information.What visa status will I have while my OPT application is pending and while I am working on OPT?During your pending OPT application and after the OPT approval by USCIS, F-1 students will remain in F-1 status under the I-20 sponsorship of Northwestern University. OPT is a benefit of your F-1 status and extends your ability to remain in the United States for the purpose of seeking employment in your field of study. This means that you will continue to use your Northwestern University OPT I-20 and F-1 documents to travel and you will need to get travel signatures from OISS every 6 months. This also means that OISS
and you will need to get travel signatures from OISS every 6 months. This also means that OISS is still responsible for reporting changes about your status to SEVIS and helping you maintain your F-1 status while you are on OPT.Do I need an SSN (Social Security Number) to work in the U.S.? Yes, a Social Security Number (SSN) is required for any paid employment in the United States. You can apply for an SSN as part of the OPT application to USCIS, but you will not receive the SSN card until after your OPT is approved.Applying for OPTThe OPT application process involves both OISS and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) and can take 3 – 5 months. OPT applications can be rather complex. The first step is to complete the required online OISS Optional Practical Training course (see instructions below). Once you are approved for OPT, you will receive an Employment Authorization Document (EAD Card) and I-797 Approval Notice from USCIS. These documents do not necessarily
Document (EAD Card) and I-797 Approval Notice from USCIS. These documents do not necessarily arrive on the same date. This webpage provides instruction related to the online application only.
USCIS also offers a premium processing option for OPT and STEM OPT applications. The premium processing fee is an additional $1,685 and the response processing timeframe on a complete application is 30 calendar days. See USCIS Premium Processing for additional information.OISS Optional Practical Training Course (online)OISS has launched an online OPT tutorial! Starting in January 2024, all students who submit an Optional Training Training (OPT) Recommendation request in the OISS Portal must submit a copy of their Certificate of Completion from the new online OISS OPT course. Students should complete the course BEFORE beginning their application for OPT and save the certificate. The course is a comprehensive guide to applying for OPT, eligibility, and reporting requirements.How do I access the online OISS OPT course? If you already have a Homebase account (used for the online Orientation course which began in Winter 2023):
Go to: https://homebase.english3.com/#/
Enter your email address (used to create your Homebase account) and password.
If you can’t remember your password, click on “forgot password” and follow the instructions to reset your password.
Click on “My Courses” at the right top of your screen,
Then click “Add Course” at the bottom of this page.
For “Organization” select “Northwestern University”
For “Access Code” enter NUOPT and click search.
Begin the Optional Practical Training course.
If you have any issues accessing the course, please email: intoff@northwestern.edu

If you are a new user to Homebase, create your Homebase account & access the OPT course:
If you are a new user to Homebase, create your Homebase account & access the OPT course: 

Go to: https://checkout.english3.com/homebase/register/
Select Institution:    Northwestern University
Enter the Access Code:   NUOPT
Enter the rest of your information and set a password. Make note of the email used and the password you set so that you can return to Homebase as needed.
Click on the "My Courses" tab on the top right
Begin the Optional Practical Training course.
If you have any issues accessing the course, please email: intoff@northwestern.edu
When to Apply
You can apply for OPT up to 90 days before and up to 60 days after the program end date on your Form I-20. If USCIS receives your application more than 90 days before your I-20 program end date or more than 60 days after your I-20 program end date, it will be rejected.Refer to the chart below for upcoming dates:
Term
Program End Date
Apply for OPT 90 days before program end date(Earliest date USCIS will receive application)
EarliestOPT Start Date
Latest OPT Start Date  (End date of grace period & last date USCIS will accept OPT application)


Winter Quarter 2024
03/16/2024
12/17/2023
03/17/2024
05/15/2024


Spring Semester (Law) 2024
05/02/2024
02/02/2024
05/03/2024
07/01/2024


Spring Quarter 2024
06/08/2024
03/10/2024
06/09/2024
08/07/2024


Summer Quarter 2024
08/24/2024
05/26/2024
08/25/2024
10/23/2024


Fall Quarter 2024
12/14/2024
09/15/2024
12/15/2024
02/12/2025


Fall Semester (Law) 2024
12/19/2024
09/20/2024
12/20/2024
02/17/2025
All OPT applicants must first obtain an OPT recommendation on a new I-20 (the OPT I-20). Before applying, submit your OPT Request at the OISS Portal. Students can submit their OPT Request in the OISS Portal up to 100 days before their I-20 program end date.
If USCIS receives your application more than 90 days before your I-20 program end date or more than 60 days after your I-20 program end date, your application will be denied. Due to this, OISS will not process your OPT Recommendation request until the 90 day deadline has been reached or passed.
The program end date on your I-20 matches your final term of enrollment (excluding some PhD students). If you finish your program earlier than your I-20 end date, the OISS will shorten your I-20 end date to the final date of the term you are applying for OPT based on your OPT Request.
USCIS must receive your full and complete OPT application no more than 60 days after your expected program completion date (end date on your I-20).
Your OPT application will be denied if it is received by USCIS more than 30 days after the recommendation for OPT is entered into SEVIS. In order to avoid a denial, we highly suggest that you submit your application to USCIS within 15 days.
If it is close to the 30 day timeline and you have not submitted your application to USCIS, do not send your I-765 to USCIS and instead request a new OPT I-20 through the OISS Portal by submitting the “Optional Practical Training (OPT): Past 30 Days OR Change Recommended Dates” request via the OISS Portal.
How to Apply
Complete your "Optional Practical Training (OPT) Recommendation" request via the OISS Portal. The OPT Request requires two important components:  1) The Certificate of Completion of the online OISS OPT course (see instructions above) and 2) The recommendation for OPT that will need to be completed by your academic advisor, PI, or director of graduate studies.
You will need to provide the full name and email address of your academic advisor, PI or director of graduate studies providing your recommendation in the OPT request. OISS advisors are not your “recommender” in the OPT Request on the OISS Portal.
The OPT recommendation will be sent to your academic advisor, PI or director of graduate studies via email. The academic advisor certifies:

You have completed all your course requirements.
You are going to graduate in the term you have indicated on your OPT request. Please note, PhD students must be ABD before applying for OPT.
You are in good academic standing.


You should discuss this request with your academic advisor (not OISS advisor) before completing the request in the portal. We cannot process the OPT request until the electronic recommendation from your academic advisor has been received.
Your OISS Advisor will review your request for OPT. If you are eligible for OPT, you will be issued an updated I-20 with OPT Recommendation to submit with your OPT application. After the OISS receives your electronic recommendation, please allow 5 business days for the OISS to process your updated I-20 with your OPT Recommendation on page 2. See image from page 2 of example I-20 with OPT recommendation:
Prepare OPT Application Materials: While waiting for your new I-20 with your OPT Recommendation, prepare your OPT application documents and digital photos as outlined under Step 1 of the Online I-765 Application for OPT. 
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with OPT Recommendation:
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with OPT Recommendation: 
You will receive an email notifying you when your updated I-20 with OPT recommendation has been processed and is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. You will then be able to print your updated I-20 with OPT recommendation from your “Documents” section of the OISS Portal. You will need to sign in ink in the student attestation section of the document. This is the easiest and fastest way to receive your I-20.
Review all your documents carefully before sending or submitting your OPT application: Check your major and degree level on page 1 of your I-20 and check your OPT recommendation on page 2 of your I-20. 

You are responsible for your OPT application and we recommend that you independently check dates, deadlines, addresses and the I-765 instructions We recommend you photocopy and/or save an electronic copy of your FULL application.


File your COMPLETE application with USCIS within 30 days of the date the OISS processed your OPT request. The OPT recommendation on the OPT I-20 is only valid for 30 days. OISS recommends you submit your complete OPT application within 15 days of the date your advisor recommends you for OPT on the I-20.
IMPORTANT: The application MUST be received by USCIS within 30 days of OISS recommending OPT in your SEVIS record and issuing your OPT I-20 or OPT will be denied. If it has been more than 30 days since your OPT I-20 was issued and you have not sent or submitted your application, please submit a new OPT request at the OISS Portal and email your OISS advisor. Application Materials ChecklistThe online I-765 application is available ONLY for F-1 students applying for Post Completion OPT or the STEM Extension of OPT. The online I-765 cannot be used for any other type of employment authorization application. Be sure to check your application for any errors before submitting.
See the following links for detailed instructions for filing the I-765 online application:
Online I-765 Application for Post-Completion OPT
Online I-765 Application for STEM OPT Extension
Avoid Form I-765 DelaysReview the CIS Ombudsman tip sheet on How F-1 Students Seeking Optional Practical Training Can Avoid Form I-765 Delays.FAQs about the OPT Application ProcessWhat is the OPT filing fee?The OPT filing fee as of October 2023 is $410. Please check USCIS Filing Fees to verify the correct current fee amount.
Once you are ready to submit your form I-765 online, the system will automatically direct you to the secure Department of Treasury site, pay.gov, to pay your fees online. USCIS only uses pay.gov to process fees. Always check the website address before you pay. Beware of scam websites and scammers who may pretend to be a USCIS website.What are the requirements for the photos?OISS strongly recommends students applying for OPT use a professional visa/passport photo service (such as the photo department at Walgreens or CVS) to ensure the photo meets all requirements for the OPT application. We are aware of numerous circumstances in which students initially received approval utilizing the online photo tool, and later had their OPT application rejected due to issues with the photo. The acceptance of your digital image or photo is at the discretion of USCIS.
The digital photo requirements for filing online are different from the paper photo requirements for filing a paper application by mail. See requirements below.
Digital photo requirements for filing your OPT application ONLINE:

You must prepare a digital passport-style photo taken within the last 30 days and the photo must follow the U.S. Department of State guidelines. Please review the following resources:
Photo Requirements
Photo Composition Template.
Be sure to check that your photo file has an acceptable name that follows USCIS's file name formatting outlined in the instructions and is saved as either a .jpeg / .jpg or .png file type. The online OPT application has a photo tool you can use to check your photo. 



How do I choose my OPT start date?As part of the OPT I-20 request process, you must request an OPT start date. This is the day on which you would like to start working while on OPT. Some things to consider when choosing your requested OPT start date:
The requested start date must be within 60 days of your program end date on your I-20. It can be as early as the day after your end date and up to 60 days after that.
It is not guaranteed that you will be approved for the start date you request. Your approved start date will appear on your Employment Authorization Document, or EAD card and may be later than your requested start date. Please note that you may not begin working until your approved EAD start date, regardless of the requested date on your I-20.
Do you have travel plans? If you plan to travel, especially internationally, you may not want to select a start date during your planned travel time.
If you have a job offer, discuss with your employer an appropriate start date based on when you have applied for your OPT (consider the 3-to-5-month processing time).
If you don't have a job offer, you should consider where you are in your job search and when jobs typically start in your field and make your best estimate of when you'd like to begin working.
Days of unemployment only begin after the approved start date listed on your EAD.
Weigh the pros and cons of an early vs. late start date. If you choose an earlier start date, you may be able to begin your employment earlier, BUT if you don't find a job, you will begin accruing unemployment days sooner. If you choose a later start date, your unemployment days will begin accruing later, BUT you'll have to wait longer to begin employment.
What is the usual processing time?The average USCIS processing time to issue the OPT Employment Authorization Document (EAD) is 3 to 5 months.
USCIS also now offers premium processing for OPT and STEM OPT Applications. The timeline for premium processing is 30 calendar days and requires you to file a Form I-907 in addition to the I-765 There is an additional fee of $1,685 for premium processing, which is in addition to the I-765 application fee. Read more about USCIS premium processing.What if I forgot to submit my OPT application to USCIS within the 30-day deadline?If OISS recommended you for OPT more than 30 days ago and you have not yet submitted your application to USCIS, you'll need a new OPT I-20 from OISS.
If you are still within your 60-day grace period and otherwise eligible to apply for OPT, submit another OPT Request in the OISS portal. This request is titled the OPT: Past 30 Days or Change Recommendation Dates. 
Do not send in an application if more than 30 days have passed. Your application will be rejected.
What if I applied for OPT, but did not complete my degree program as planned?Please contact your OISS Advisor as soon as possible to discuss your situation.While You Wait for Your OPT EAD CardTo verify the current average OPT processing time with USCIS, check the I-765 USCIS processing times.What to expect after submitting your OPT application to USCISUpon submission of your application: You will receive a confirmation that your Form I-765 was successfully submitted. Following the completion of your online filing, you should be able to review your I-765 receipt notice in your online myUSCIS account and track the status of the application.
Within 4 - 6 weeks: You will receive an I-797c receipt notice at your mailing address confirming the date of receipt and your receipt number. Keep this notice safe as it is your official proof that your OPT application was submitted. If there are any errors in the receipt notice in your name, address, or application type, contact your OISS adviser right away.
Around 3 – 5 months: You should receive an I-797 Notice of Approval letter and EAD card at your mailing address. These items may arrive separately or at the same time. Check your EAD card to make sure all information is correct. You can start working on your EAD start date! If there are any errors on the EAD, contact your OISS adviser right away.
Around 2 Weeks after receiving EAD card: You should receive your Social Security Card (if you requested one).Can I work on or off campus while waiting for my Employment Authorization Document (EAD)?While waiting for your EAD card to arrive…..
And until the program end date on your I-20, you can continue working ON CAMPUS. You may also continue to work on pre-approved CPT.
After your I-20 program end date, you cannot work anywhere until you have your physical EAD card in your possession; you may begin working on the first day listed in the “valid from” section of your EAD.
Travel Outside the U.S. While OPT is PendingTravel during the OPT application process is allowed, but not recommended as it poses certain risks.
Consider the following:
You should include a different mailing address than your own with an “in care of” person designated in your I-765 if you plan international travel while your OPT is pending. The mail systems in Chicago area apartment buildings can be challenging and it is not guaranteed you will receive mail when you are not there.
If you receive a Request for Evidence, you will need to respond by a certain deadline and all mail to USCIS must be sent from within the U.S.
If you are denied for OPT while outside the United States, you will not be able to re-enter the U.S to reapply. If you are within your 60-day grace period when your denial is received, your only option is to refile online.
If you are approved for OPT while outside the United States, you will need to arrange for your EAD card to be sent to you abroad to re-enter the United States. USCIS only sends EAD cards to U.S. addresses and your name or your “in care of” designee’s name must be on the mailbox.
If your F-1 visa is expired, you will need to reapply for an F-1 visa with your EAD card and I-20.
If you choose to travel while your application is pending, be sure that you are monitoring your mail.  
Problems With Your OPT ApplicationThere are several types of problems that may occur during your OPT application:
Delayed processing
Not receiving your I-797c Receipt Notice
Request for Evidence or Denial
Incorrect EAD
If there is any problem with your OPT application, contact your OISS Advisor right away so we can provide guidance on your situation. If you do not receive your EAD card because it is undeliverable or lost in the mail, refer to our Replacement EAD Card webpage.When your EAD arrivesUpon receiving your Employment Authorization Document (EAD), check the following:1.     Verify Personal Information
Ensure your name is spelled correctly and matches the name on your Form I-20.
Confirm the accuracy of your date of birth, country of birth, and sex.
2.	Review Work Authorization Dates:
Check the start and end dates for which you are authorized to work.
3.	Confirm the Correct Category:
For Post-Completion OPT, the category should be CO3B.
For STEM OPT Extension, the category should be CO3C.
4.     If  your EAD card contains incorrect information due to a USCIS error:
You must return the original EAD card to USCIS to get it corrected. See Replacement EAD Card for instructions.
If you are not sure if the error was made by USCIS or if you have questions, please contact your OISS Advisor.
While on OPTConsult the While on OPT resource for important information related to rules and reporting requirements, practical matters, definitions of employment and unemployment, accessing and using the SEVP Portal, and much more.What do I need to understand while on OPT?The Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with and follow OPT reporting requirements.
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility
may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentSTEM OPT for F1 Students
F-1 STEM OPT ExtensionThe 24-month extension of Post-Completion OPT is for students who have completed a degree listed in the STEM Designated Degree Program List. Students who have completed a previous degree in a STEM designated program from a U.S. institution within the past ten years and have completed a new degree at Northwestern University are also eligible for STEM OPT Extension. 
To verify whether you qualify for the STEM OPT Extension, check the STEM Designated Degree Program List and verify your program name and the CIP code for your major found on page 1 of your I-20 under Program of Study. 
Eligibility Requirements for STEM OPT Extension
Your program listed on your I-20 must be listed in the STEM Designated Degree Program List. 
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) maintains a complete list of fields that fall within the regulatory definition of “STEM field” that qualifies certain degrees to fulfill the STEM OPT extension requirement. This list is known as the STEM Designated Degree Program list.  
The  Northwestern Academic Programs and CIP Codesalso identifies programs with a STEM eligible CIP code. Please note this list is organized first by education level (Bachelor's, Master's, Doctorate) and then by CIP Code, in numerical order within each education level.
You must currently be employed or have a job offer from an employer registered with E-Verify. 
Your employer/supervisor must complete the Form I-983 Training Plan for STEM OPT Students. The form is to be completed jointly by the STEM OPT student and employer/supervisor.
You must apply before your post-completion period of OPT expires, and your application must be sent to USCIS within 60 days of the date the STEM OPT Extension I-20 was issued and signed by the OISS Advisor. You may apply up to 90 days before your post-completion OPT expires. Please note that you may continue to work up to 180 days while your STEM OPT Extension application is pending with USCIS and you have your receipt notice.
Employer RequirementsEmployers of F-1 students on STEM OPT Extensions, or who wish to support an employee preparing an application for a 24-month STEM OPT Extension, must meet the following requirements:

Enrolled in E-Verify electronic eligibility verification system
Enrolled in E-Verify electronic eligibility verification system


All employers of STEM OPT Extension students must complete and sign the Form I-983, Training Plan for STEM OPT Students, together with their STEM OPT student employee. For more details on the I-983 and employer responsibilities while they employ a student on their STEM OPT Extension, view this information from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. For details on the I-983 itself, view the overview and instructions linked below.

Form I-983 Overview
Form I-983 Instructions



NOTE: Employers may use existing training programs as long as the existing training program or policy aligns with the goals of the STEM OPT student’s continued learning and all other regulatory requirements.Northwestern University Hiring DepartmentsThe following information will be helpful when completing the I-983 (NOTE: This information is specific to Northwestern University only)
NU FEIN: 362167817
Full Time Employees: 10,839
NAICS Code: 611310
E-Verify Number: 297964
Application ProcessHow do I begin a STEM OPT Extension Request?Submit your STEM OPT Extension request on the OISS Portal.
PLEASE NOTE: The STEM OPT Extension Request will appear as an option in the OISS Portal ONLY if both of the following eligibility conditions are met:

You have completed a degree listed in the STEM Designated Degree Program List
It is 100 days or less from the end date of your Post-Completion OPT
You must submit your request at least 2 weeks before your post-completion OPT end date and you can submit this request as early as 100 days before your post-completion OPT end date. Remember, the request will appear 100 days prior to the end date of Post-Completion OPT as an option in the OISS portal to STEM majors only.
Your STEM OPT Extension request will be processed and your new I-20 with the STEM OPT Extension recommendation will be ready in 5 business days or less. 
You will receive an email notifying you when your new I-20 with the STEM OPT Extension recommendation is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. 
You will then be able to print your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension recommendation from your “Documents” section of the OISS Portal. This is the easiest and fastest way to receive your I-20.
Please be sure to:
Review the top of page 2 of your I-20 to verify your STEM OPT recommendation information is correct.
Sign both I-20s on the bottom of the first page in the “Student Attestation” section. One I-20 is for you to send to USCIS with your OPT application and the 2nd is for you to keep as your current I-20.
Online application for STEM OPT ExtensionFollow these steps:
Prepare STEM OPT Extension application materials: While waiting for your new I-20 with your OPT recommendation, prepare your STEM OPT Extension application documents and digital photo as explained in detail on the OISS resource Online I-765 Application for STEM OPT Extension.
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension Recommendation: You will receive an email notifying you when your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension recommendation has been processed and is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. You will then be able to print your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension recommendation from your “Documents” section of the OISS Portal. You will need to sign in ink in the student attestation section of the document.
Review all your documents carefully before sending or submitting your STEM OPT Extension application: Check your major and degree level on page 1 of your I-20 and check your STEM OPT Extension recommendation on page 2 of your I-20. You are responsible for your STEM OPT Extension application and we recommend that you independently check dates, deadlines, and the I-765 instructions We recommend you photocopy and/or save an electronic copy of your FULL application.
File your COMPLETE application with USCIS within 30 days of the date the OISS processed your STEM OPT Extension request. The STEM OPT Extension recommendation on the OPT I-20 is only valid for 30 days. OISS recommends you submit your complete STEM OPT application within 15 days of the date your advisor recommends you for STEM OPT Extension on the I-20.
IMPORTANT:The application MUST be received by USCIS within 30 days of OISS recommending STEM OPT Extension in your SEVIS record and issuing your STEM OPT Extension I-20 or STEM OPT will be denied.If it has been more than 30 days since your STEM OPT Extension I-20 was issued and you have not sent or submitted your application, please submit a new STEM OPT Extension request at the OISS Portal and email your OISS advisor.Frequently Asked Questions about STEM OPT and the application processWhat are the requirements for the photos?OISS strongly recommends students applying for STEM OPT use a professional visa/passport photo service (such as the photo department at Walgreens or CVS) to ensure the photo meets all requirements for the STEM OPT application. We are aware of numerous circumstances in which students initially received approval utilizing the online photo tool, and later had their OPT application rejected due to issues with the photo. The acceptance of your digital image or photo
application rejected due to issues with the photo. The acceptance of your digital image or photo is at the discretion of USCIS.
The digital photo requirements for filing online are different from the paper photo requirements for filing a paper application by mail. See requirements below.
Digital photo requirements for filing your STEM OPT application ONLINE

You must prepare a digital passport-style photo taken within the last 30 days and the photo must follow the U.S. Department of State guidelines. Please review the following resources:
Photo Requirements
Photo Composition Template.
Be sure to check that your photo file has an acceptable name that follows USCIS's file name formatting outlined in the instructions and is saved as either a .jpeg / .jpg or .png file type. The online OPT application has a photo tool you can use to check your photo.
How long will it take for my STEM OPT application to be approved?Processing times vary greatly, but you should expect USCIS to take about 3 – 5 months  to approve your STEM OPT Extension application.Can I work while my STEM OPT application is pending?
Your work authorization and F-1 status is automatically extended for up to 180 days while the STEM OPT Extension application is pending.
The 180 days counts from the end date of your initial Post-Completion OPT period.
Only applies if your STEM OPT Extension application was received by USCIS before the end date on your initial Post-Completion OPT period.
Your I-797C Receipt Notice serves as documentation of your pending STEM OPT Extension application.
What are CIP codes?Classification of Instructions Programs (CIP) codes are published by the National Center for Education Statistics (NES).   Your CIP code determines whether your major has been designated as a STEM major eligible for the STEM OPT Extension. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) STEM Designated Degree Program List is a complete list of fields of study that DHS considers to be science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) fields of study for purposes of the 24-month STEM optional practical training extension.My department changed CIP codes. Can I apply for the STEM OPT Extension?There is an administrative process that NU departments must go through to change the CIP code. Once the CIP code change has been approved, the NU registrar updates the CIP code based on the parameters of the approval. After the registrar updates the CIP code, the OISS will update the CIP codes in SEVIS. You may request a new I-20 with the updated CIP code. Please request a
the CIP codes in SEVIS. You may request a new I-20 with the updated CIP code. Please request a reprint for your I-20 via the OISS Portal. In the request, please choose Other from the drop down and explain that your CIP code changed in the area provided.
Once the CIP code has been updated, you may meet the CIP code requirements for STEM OPT Extension eligibility.Does USCIS offer premium processing for STEM OPT applications?Yes, USCIS now offers premium processing for both OPT and STEM OPT applications. The timeline for premium processing is 30 calendar days and requires you to file a Form I-907 in addition to the I-765 There is an additional fee of $1,685 for premium processing, which is in addition to the I-765 application fee. Read more about USCIS premium processing.Can I apply for the OPT STEM Extension based on a prior degree?If you otherwise qualify for the STEM OPT Extension and can fill-out the I-983 training plan with your current employer outlining how you are using your STEM coursework in your job, you can apply for the STEM OPT extension based on a previously earned degree as long as both degrees were received from currently accredited educational institutions.
You will need to contact your OISS Advisor to initiate a STEM OPT Extension request based on a prior degree. Can I apply for STEM OPT more than once?If you complete another STEM-eligible degree at a higher academic level, you may apply for a second 24 month period of STEM OPT if you otherwise meet the STEM OPT Extension qualifications.What is the H-1B Cap- Gap Extension?A cap-gap extension is a regulatory provision which extends an eligible F-1 student's status to bridge the gap between the end of F-1 status and start of H-1B status, thereby allowing the student to remain in the U.S. during the "gap”. The cap-gap extension is available to students who, as of April 1st, were either on approved OPT or in their 60-day grace period and have a pending or approved change-of-status H-1B petition with USCIS that was filed in a timely manner.  To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the
be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed.
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit the Cap-Gap Extension request at the OISS Portal.
Cap-Gap extensions cannot be used if you will be in H-1B status in a non-profit or research educational institution.
For more information, please contact your OISS advisor.When your EAD arrivesUpon receiving your Employment Authorization Document (EAD), check the following:1.	Verify Personal Information:
Ensure your name is spelled correctly and matches the name on your Form I-20.
Confirm the accuracy of your date of birth, country of birth, and sex.
2.	Review Work Authorization Dates:
Check the start and end dates for which you are authorized to work.
3.	Confirm the Correct Category:
For Post-Completion OPT, the category should be CO3B.
For STEM OPT Extension, the category should be CO3C.
4.  If your EAD card contains incorrect information due a USCIS error:
4.  If your EAD card contains incorrect information due a USCIS error:
You must return the original EAD card to USCIS to get it corrected. See Replacement EAD Card for instructions.
If you are not sure if the error was made by USCIS or if you have questions, please contact your OISS Advisor.
While on STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved STEM OPT. As an F-1 student on STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Consult the While on STEM OPT resource for important information related to rules and reporting requirements, practical matters, ending STEM OPT, and much more.Are the reporting requirements and rules for STEM OPT the same as 12 month OPT?Compared to the 12-month OPT period, there are several additional requirements while on STEM OPT.  Details and instructions related to  these requirements are outlined on the While on STEM OPT section including:
Reporting requirements while on STEM OPT
International Travel while on STEM OPT
Practical matters while on STEM OPT (health insurance, taxes, etc.)
Ending STEM OPT and departing the U.S. or changing status
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility
may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentSEVP Student Portal
SEVP Student PortalThe SEVP Student Portal is a tool that F-1 students on post-completion optional practical training (OPT) or STEM OPT extension can use to meet their legal reporting requirements, such as reporting changes to their home address, telephone number and employer information. Students on STEM OPT will not be able to add a new employer or change the start date, but can update their other information about an employer already in the system.As a student on post-completion OPT or STEM OPT, you will be eligible to use the portal. The portal is accessible from both your mobile device and computer.We recommend reviewing the SEVP Student Portal User Guide, which provides step-by-step instructions for using the portal, before creating your account.Useful Resources All of the following links are from DHS Study in the States
SEVP PORTAL HELP
SEVP PORTAL OVERVIEW
CREATE AN SEVP PORTAL ACCOUNT
MAKE AND MAINTAIN USER PASSWORD
SEVP PORTAL USER GUIDE
NAVIGATE THE SEVP PORTAL
UPDATE USER PROFILE (update address)
UPDATE EMPLOYER INFORMATION
OPT STUDENT REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
STEM OPT STUDENT REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
SEVP PORTAL VIDEOS
LOGIN PAGE FOR SEVP PORTAL
How can I learn more about OPT and STEM OPT reporting requirements?
OPT Reporting Requirements
STEM OPT Extension Reporting Requirements
FAQsWho can use the SEVP Student Portal?
F-1 International students participating in post-completion Optional Practical Training (OPT).
F-1 International students participating in a science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) OPT extension.
What are the benefits of creating an SEVP Student Portal Account
Students can meet their regulatory reporting requirements.
It will enhance data integrity.
Data entered into the Portal is sent immediately to SEVIS.
Students will be able to monitor their employment authorization.
Students will be able to edit their profile and employment information.
Students will be able to view history.
What information can students on post-completion OPT report via the SEVP Portal?F-1 students completing practical training can update their:
Physical home address
Mailing address
Telephone number
Employer information

Please note: It may take up to one month for employment data reported through the SEVP Portal to appear in your employment records in the OISS portal.What information can students on STEM OPT report via the SEVP Portal?F-1 students participating in STEM OPT can update their:
Physical home address
Mailing address
Telephone number
F-1 students participating in STEM OPT will not be able to add a new employer or change the start date in the SEVP Portal due to the Form I-983 requirementIs there a fee I need to pay to create an SEVP Student account?No, there is no cost associated with creating an account or accessing the Portal.When can I register with the SEVP Student Portal?After your OPT application has been approved by USCIS, you will receive an automated email with a registration link on the EAD start date. You will not be able to report OPT information until the OPT start date on your EAD card.Should I use my Northwestern email address for the SEVP Student Portal?No, you should not use your Northwestern student email as it will be deactivated after you graduate. We recommend you use a personal email address that you check on a regular basis for future communications and reporting purposes. After you graduate, your NU email address will be deactivated at some point (varies by school and academic level).Can I
your NU email address will be deactivated at some point (varies by school and academic level).Can I change my personal email address to another personal email address?Yes, OISS can change your email address in SEVIS per your request (send to intoff@northwestern.edu). After this change is completed, you will receive an email notification from the SEVP Student Portal about the change and instructions to log in with your new email address.What do I do if I have not received the notification email from SEVP?If you never received the email (please check your SPAM/JUNK folders), you may send a request for an initial SEVP Student Portal email by contacting SEVP@ice.dhs.gov. If you did receive the email but the link expired or you locked your account, you may use a "Password Reset" option on your SEVP Portal log in page, or contact intoff@northwestern.edu to reset your account.Who should I contact if I need help with my SEVP Student Portal Account?If you need help with your account, please
if I need help with my SEVP Student Portal Account?If you need help with your account, please call the SEVP Response Center at 703-603-3400 and refer to the resources at the top of this page.Can I ask OISS to update my information in the SEVP Student Portal for me?
DSOs (Designated School Officials in OISS) cannot access the SEVP Student Portal, but if you are approaching a reporting deadline and do not currently have access to your account, OISS can update the information on your behalf directly in SEVIS. 
This option should be used as an exception only, and you should make updates in the SEVP Student Portal yourself whenever possible.
DSOs can help with:
Requesting the Initial Portal Account Creation email be resent.
Requesting the locked student's Portal Account be unlocked.
Changing the student's email address for the Portal.
Who should I contact if I notice an error in my information?Students will be able to edit: Address, telephone number, employer information (except on STEM due to I-983 requirement)Students should contact OISS to edit: Name, date of birth, email addressMy SEVP Portal account is locked. Who should I contact?After three failed attempts, or if the user does not log in to the Portal for 90 days, the Portal will lock the student out. If your account is locked, you may use a "Password Reset" option on your SEVP Portal log in page, or contact OISS and ask to submit a request in SEVIS to unlock your SEVP Student Portal account.Am I required to use the SEVP Student Portal?Yes, this is the current way of reporting information on OPT/STEM OPT.How long will I have access to the SEVP Student Portal?You will have access to your SEVP Student Portal for up to 6 months after your OPT ends. SEVP will send an email alert 5 months after your OPT authorization has ended notifying you that your Portal
send an email alert 5 months after your OPT authorization has ended notifying you that your Portal access will end in 30 days. You will receive another email alert on the day your Portal access ends notifying you that the access has ended. It is recommended to make copies/take screenshots of your SEVP Portal records for future reference.Tips on Reporting via the SEVP Student Portal
You should not edit existing employer’s information when changing to a new employer.
Do not delete employer’s information if trying to update information, only delete if you never worked for that employer.
Report volunteer positions only if they are directly related to your degree.
Start of employment should not be backdated more than 10 days.
Add DO-NOT-REPLY.SEVP@ICE.DHS.GOV to approved email contacts to avoid emails from going into your Spam/Junk folder.
Log in at least every 3 months even if you have nothing to report, to ensure that your SEVP Student Portal account stays active.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPT
While on OPT & STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT or STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so that you remain in valid visa status.
Select the correct box below that describes your status (OPT or STEM OPT) to find information on the following topics and more:

Employment and unemployment
Rules and reporting requirements
Travel while on OPT/STEM OPT
Practical matters while on OPT/STEM OPT
Accessing the SEVP portal and the OISS portal
Applying for OPT or STEM OPT?
If you are looking for information on applying for OPT or STEM OPT, please see Apply for OPT or Apply for STEM OPT.While on OPTFor students currently participating in Optional Practical Training (OPT).
OPT reporting requirements & rulesWhile on STEM OPTFor students currently participating in STEM OPT Extension.
STEM OPTreporting requirements & rules
HomeInternational StudentsAdvising International Students
Advising International StudentsThis page is intended for Northwestern faculty and staff who work with international students.
International students are required to maintain their immigration status by following U.S. Department of Homeland Security and/or U.S. Department of State regulations. The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) is here to help students, advisors, faculty, and departments understand these regulations. On this page you will find helpful terms and immigration regulations. Please know you can always contact OISS for additional guidance.
OISS plays a vital role in providing immigration advisory services to Northwestern University's F-1 and J-1 international students. Furthermore, we are responsible for ensuring compliance with the Department of Homeland Security's reporting requirements for all F-1 and J-1 students sponsored by the university. F-1 students with approved work authorization for OPT or STEM OPT and J-1 students with approved work authorization for post-completion AT continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. OISS provides immigration guidance to this group of F-1 and J-1 international alumni and maintains the SEVIS record of each student throughout their work authorization period under Northwestern’s sponsorship.
Given the complexity of immigration law and the potential serious consequences of violations, we highly recommend that all university departments refer F-1 and J-1 international students to OISS for any immigration-related concerns or inquiries. Your partnership with us is invaluable in ensuring that our international students have a successful compliant experience at Northwestern University.Key RegulationsGlossary of TermsKey RegulationsOpenCloseKey regulations to know if you work with international students
Full-Time Enrollment
Federal immigration regulations require nonimmigrant students in F-1 or J-1 status to be enrolled in a full-time course load each term to maintain nonimmigrant visa status. Students who are not enrolled full time by the end of each add/drop period or who drop below full-time without approval by the OISS violate their student immigration status.
Undergraduate and graduate students are considered to be full time when they enroll in 3.00 units of credit or more per quarter
Pritzker School of Law: LLM and MSL programs define full-time enrollment as 8 or more credits per semester. JD programs (including JDMBA) define full-time enrollment as 9 or more credits per semester
Full-time enrollment is required in the summer term only if it is a student's first or last term of enrollment.

Students must be physically present on Northwestern's campus during every quarter of enrollment unless otherwise approved for study or research abroad.

Online Coursework
Online Coursework

For both graduate and undergraduate F-1 and J-1 students, only one unit or 1 credit of online/remote course may count toward the full-time enrollment requirement. The one unit/credit limit is for every academic term when students are expected to be enrolled full-time. 
If F-1 or J-1 students enroll in more than their minimum unit requirement, they MAY enroll in more than one unit of online/remote courses.
Hybrid courses with required on-campus components do not count towards this limitation.


Reduced Course Load (RCL)
Students can only be allowed to drop below full-time for specific academic or medical reasons. They must be authorized by OISS for a reduced course load (RCL) BEFORE dropping below full-time.
Academic Reduced Course Load
A RCL for specific academic reasons requires recommendation of student’s academic or major advisor. There are two types of academic reduced course loads available to international students:
A final-term student completing their course of study who does not require a full course load to complete. 
Academic difficulties due to initial difficulty with the English language or reading requirements, unfamiliarity with U.S. teaching methods,  or improper course level placement. This is only applicable during the first quarter; students must resume a full course load at the next  academic term.  
Students cannot be enrolled in only online coursework , even if approved for a RCL by OISS. 
Students on approved academic RCLs are not eligible for CPT employment authorization.

Medical Reduced Course Load
Students may apply for a RCL due to a medical condition diagnosed and documented by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy, licensed psychologist, or licensed psychiatrist. Please note:
A RCL for medical reasons may be recommended for more than one term but cannot exceed 12-months. Students must reapply for a medical RCL each term.  
For students not working with Student Assistance and Support Services (SASS), additional documentation is required. A letter will be needed which must specify and include recommendations from the physician or psychologist on whether the student should have  part-time or no enrollment, as well as indicating the term for which the reduced course load is applicable.  
Students can be approved for part-time enrollment or no enrollment at all if recommend by the medical professional. Even students not enrolled will remain active in the SEVIS government system if they are approved for a medical RCL.


Program Extensions
Program Extensions

If a student doesn’t complete their program of study by the date listed on their immigration document (I-20 or DS-2019), they must have an academic or medical reason for failing to complete. Examples include: change of major, addition of major, or addition of minor; change in research topic; unexpected research problems; documented medical illness.
Delays to a program of study caused by academic probation or an internship, is not a compelling reason.


On-Campus Employment

F-1 and J-1 students can work on-campus up to 20 hours a week at an on-campus job while school is in session.
F-1 and J-1 students can work on-campus full time during break and vacation periods.
J-1 students must have authorized prior to any on-campus work.


Off-Campus Employment
Off-Campus Employment

F-1 and J-1 students must have authorization prior to any off-campus work, including internships.
Any off-campus work must be directly related to the student’s field of study.
Generally, F-1 students are not eligible for off-campus work until they have completed two full-time semesters.
See CPT, OPT, OPT STEM Extension, and Academic Training (Glossary of Terms tab) for more details.
Glossary of TermsOpenClose



SEVIS

Student and Exchange Visitor Information System. This is a web-based Department of Homeland Security (DHS) database system used to reconfirmation on all F-1 and J-1 visa holders. To gain access to the system, the University must go through SEVP certification. DSOs (DesignatedSchool Officials) and AROs (Alternate Responsible Officers) must go through training before being granted access to the SEVIS system and must meet specific reporting requirements in accordance with immigration regulations.



 
Form I-20 Certificate of Eligibility
Form I-20 Certificate of Eligibility



The Form I-20 is an official immigration document issued by a U.S. government-approved educational institution certifying that a student has been admitted to a full-time study program and has demonstrated sufficient financial resources to stay in the United States. The I-20 is titled the “Certificate of Eligibility” because it allows an individual to apply for an F-1 student visa at a U.S. embassy or consulate abroad.
The expiration date on this I-20 (NOT the student’s visa expiration date) determines how long the student is permitted to stay in the U.S.





 
DS-2019 Certificate of Eligibility
The Form DS-2019 or "Certificate of Eligibility for Exchange Visitor Status (J-Nonimmigrant)" is the basic document used in the  administration of the exchange visitor program.
This form permits a prospective exchange visitor to seek an interview at a U.S. embassy or consulate in order to obtain a J-1 visa  to enter the United States.
The Form DS-2019 identifies the exchange visitor and their designated sponsor (Northwestern University) and provides a brief description of the exchange visitor’s program, including the start and end date, category of exchange, and an estimate of the full cost of the  exchange program.
The J-1 status is often used for students who are in a specific educational exchange program such as Fulbright or Northwestern affiliated  exchange partnerships.
Regular degree-seeking students are also eligible for the J-1 visa if a majority (51% or more) of their total financial funding comes from  sources other than personal funds.
The expiration date on the DS-2019 (NOT the student’s visa expiration date) determines how long the student (or exchange visitor) is permitted to stay in the U.S.
CPT

Curricular Practical Training (CPT) is a type of off-campus work authorization for F-1 students. As the name implies, this is training which provides the student with the opportunity for practical application of the knowledge gained in their program of study and is considered part of the student’s  curriculum. Usually, CPT is used for internships or other job opportunities prior to graduation for which the student will earn course credit. In  most instances, an F-1 student is not eligible for CPT until they have completed one full academic year (3 quarters or two sem



OPT


Optional Practical Training is a type of off-campus work authorization for F-1 students who have been full-time students for at least one academic  year and plan to seek employment in the United States in their field of study.
Students who wish to apply for OPT must complete the OPT Request in the OISS Portal.
The OPT Request includes several components including a “Recommendation for OPT” that will need to be completed  by the student’s academic advisor, PI, or director of graduate studies.
The OPT recommendation will be sent to the identified academic advisor, PI or director of graduate studies via an auto generated email.
The academic advisor will be asked to certify that the student requesting OPT: - has completed all course requirements. - is going to graduate in the term indicated on the OPT request (PhD students must be ABD before applying for OPT). - is in good academic standing.
Upon receiving the advisor recommendation, the OISS advisor (DSO) will review the request for OPT to determine eligibility.
Students eligible for OPT will be issued an updated Form I-20 with “OPT Recommendation.
Students eligible for OPT will be issued an updated Form I-20 with “OPT Recommendation.
The student must then apply to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) with the OPT I-20 and other required documents.
A student authorized for OPT is allowed to work within their field of study in the U.S. for up to 12 months.
Our While on OPT resource provides specific rules  and reporting requirements while on OPT.
STEM OPT Extension

STEM OPT Extension is a type of off-campus work authorization for F-1 students who have earned a degree in a STEM field (science, technology, engineering or math) that appears on the DHS STEM Designated Degree List. The specific CIP code that appears on the student's I-20 document must appear on this list and the student must meet specific STEM Extension eligibility requirements to apply for this two-year extension of their OPT work authorization.



Academic Training (AT)


Academic Training (AT) is a type of off-campus work authorization for J-1 students to gain practical experience that is directly related to their  academic program of study.
AT may include, but is not limited to, internships, practicum, cooperative education, and other types of practical experience  gained through off-campus employment.
AT may be authorized before the completion of an academic program, but it is generally used after the  completion of an academic program.
AT done prior to program completion is deducted from the total amount available upon completion.





 



Additional Resources:
Understanding Immigration Documents 
Visa Renewal
Visa Compliance and Requirements
OISS Community Listserv  - Receive OISS news and updates including the OISS Student Newsletter via email. See how to subscribe to the OISS Listserv.

If you have questions or need additional assistance, please contact OISS at intoff@northwestern.edu.
HomeInternational Scholars
International ScholarsThe Office of International Student and Scholar Services advises and assists Northwestern's international visitors and employees, including faculty members, staff, researchers, exchange visitors and short-term visitors. All university employee visas require input from the employee and his or her host department at Northwestern; we help with the process of acquiring and maintaining both immigrant and nonimmigrant visa statuses.
Compare the processing times and fees for these visas. Incoming Visitors and EmployeesTypes of visitorsVisitors fall into a variety of nonimmigrant visa categories that vary according to reason for visit, home country, or length of visit.
Short term B-1/WB visitors: Staying less than 90 days, these visitors may qualify for a B-1 Visitor Visa or a WB Visa Waiver.
J-1 visitors: Professors, researchers (including postdocs), short-term scholars, and student interns in the J-1 Exchange Visitor category have a maximum stay of five years.
Types of employeesEmployees fall in a variety of nonimmigrant visa categories that vary according to their position at the university and their home country.
H-1B employees: H-1B visa status is awarded to professionals hired to work in specialty skill areas, such as tenure-track faculty, staff members, and postdoctoral fellows.
Canadian & Mexican nationals: Citizens of Canada and Mexico are hired to work in specialty skill areas as well; they have Treaty NAFTA (TN) status.
Australian nationals: Citizens of Australia can perform a "specialty occupation" in the United States using the E-3 visa.
Individuals with Extraordinary Ability or Achievement (0-1)
O-1 status is suitable for individuals who have attained national or international acclaim for extraordinary achievements in the sciences, arts, education, business or athletics. Extraordinary ability is defined as a high level of expertise and indicates that the person is one of a small percentage who has risen to the very top of his/her field. 
Learn more about the 0-1 visa
Legal Permanent Residency
Learn more about the 0-1 visa
Legal Permanent Residency
Northwestern may sponsor international employees for Legal Permanent Resident (LPR) -- or "green card" -- immigrant status. New tenure-track faculty are eligible to apply for LPR status at the beginning of their hire; other employees are must wait a minimum of two years for Northwestern sponsorship.
Read more about becoming a Legal Permanent Resident
HomeInternational ScholarsShort Term Visitors (B1/WB)
Short Term Visitors (B1/WB)People who are temporarily visiting the United States for business fall under the B-1 or WB status.

B-1/WB visitors come to campus for 90 days or less.
The visit purpose is consultation, observation, or to give a single lecture. It is not for ongoing lecturing or ongoing teaching, research, or studying.

The Difference Between WB and B1
A visitor's citizenship will determine whether he or she falls in the WB or B-1 category:
The WB category enables citizens of participating countries to travel to the United States without obtaining a visa stamp. This is called the Visa Waiver Program. Visit the Department of State website for the most recent list of countries.
 A B-1 visa stamp is required for citizens of all other countries, or those who otherwise don’t qualify for the Visa Waiver Program.
Next Steps
Application instructions for short-term visitors and their host departments.
Compliance requirements and restrictions for B-1/WB visitors

HomeInternational ScholarsShort Term Visitors (B1/WB)Steps for Incoming Visitors and Employees
Steps for Incoming Visitors and EmployeesThe process of requesting B-1 or WB status begins with the host department. See these host department steps. 
After the department's request has been approved, the visitor will need to complete a series of steps.
Instructions for Incoming Short-Term Visitors
1. Apply for B-1 or WB visa status
B-1 status:
Schedule a visa appointment at the US Embassy or Consulate in your home country to apply for a B-1 visa stamp.
Check with the US Embassy or Consulate to verify which documents to present at the appointment. Common required documents:

OISS approved letter of invitation from Northwestern University department.
Proof that the visitor has adequate finances to support himself/herself for the duration of stay in the U.S.



WB status in the Visa Waiver Program (VWP):

The visitors passport must be issued by a VWP country and meet the requirements for VWP travel.
Submit an intent to travel through the Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA).

2. Enter the U.S.
Bring the letter of invitation from the Northwestern.

HomeInternational ScholarsShort Term Visitors (B1/WB)Visa Compliance and Requirements
Visa Compliance and RequirementsWhile visiting, the B-1 or W-B visitor must abide by the following restrictions:
Visit Length and Purpose
The visitor is limited to a stay of 90 days or less without extension for the purpose of consultation and/or observation.
The visitor cannot intend to obtain employment within the US, including a change of status to J-1 or H-1B.

Activities While at Northwestern University

The visitor cannot displace US workers and will not have a research appointment through Northwestern University.
The visitor cannot participate in or volunteer services/expertise toward any exercise essential to departmental operations.
The visitor must be in the presence of a supervisor when observing the use of lab equipment.
The visitor may not be involved in any patient contact or interact with any research subjects, either directly or indirectly.
The visitor cannot be paid for services, but may be reimbursed for travel expenses and/or given assistance with accommodations.

Financial Support and Affiliation
Financial Support and Affiliation

The visitor must have an institutional affiliation in his or her home country or country of residence.
The visitor must have adequate finances and sufficient health insurance to support himself/herself for the duration of stay.

The department must report any changes/violations related to the visitor’s stay to the IO.

HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange Visitors
J-1 Exchange VisitorsJ-1 status is used for those coming to NU as visiting researchers, professors, and collaborators. They are called J-1 Exchange Visitors.
The category was created "to increase mutual understanding between people of the United States and the people of other countries by means of educational and cultural exchanges." -- U.S. Department of State
J-1 Exchange Visitors may receive a salary or stipend from various parties. They can receive funding from Northwestern, the government, private organizations, their current place of employment (outside the U.S.), or personal funds but the funding must meet the current living expense requirements. See the Visa Compliance and Restrictions page for a specific figure.
The length of a J-1 Exchange Visitor's stay ranges depending on his or her J-1 type; however, the maximum stay is five years.

Types of Exchange Visitors
Within the overall J-1 visa status, there are several different types of visitor:

Short Term
Research 
Professor
Student Intern
Short Term
Research 
Professor
Student Intern

Each category is used for different purposes and valid for varying lengths of time. 
More on the  J-1 Exchange Visitor typesNext Steps
Application instructions for incoming J-1 Exchange Visitors
Application instructions for incoming J-1 Student Interns
Acquire visas for family and dependents
Review arrival and check-in procedures
Making changes or adjustments to J-1 visa status
J-1 visa compliance and restrictions
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsJ-1 Visa Types
J-1 Visa TypesThis page outlines the four J-1 visa categories Northwestern University is authorized to use. OISS will make the final decision on which category the J-1 Exchange Visitor receives by reviewing the information provided in the DS-2019 Request.Short-TermDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 6 monthsExamples of NU Position
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Specialized non-research, non-staff position
Purpose of Visit
Teach
Observe
Consult
Train staff
Demonstrate special skill(s)
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/ Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?Yes, unlimitedResearchDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Postdoctoral Fellow
Research Associate
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarProfessorDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Lecturer
Visiting Faculty
Visiting Scholar
Purpose of Visit
Teach (primary)
Observe
Consult
Research
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarStudent InternDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 12 monthsExamples of NU PositionInternPurpose of VisitParticipate in structured internship programPosition in Home CountryStudentReturn in category?Yes, in different internship program
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsSteps for Incoming Visitors
Steps for Incoming VisitorsThe process of requesting J-1 Exchange Visitor visa status begins with the host department.
instructions for host departments 
Once the NU department has submitted a complete J-1 request to the OISS, the OISS advisor will issue the Exchange Visitor (EV) a DS-2019, which is used to obtain his/her J-1 visa stamp at the U.S. embassy/consulate outside the U.S.
Instructions for Incoming Exchange Visitors
1. Complete the Exchange Visitor DS-2019 Request
This will be sent to you by your NU department contact. Return the completed form and associated documents (electronic copies are acceptable) so your contact can submit the request to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services.
If transferring from another U.S. Institution, you must also submit the J-1 Transfer In Form to your Northwestern department. Review the information on Extending or Transferring Status for details on the transferring your J-1 program to Northwestern.”
 
2. After the department's request is approved by OISS, the OISS will issue the Form DS 2019
The Office of International Student and Scholar Services will send (via email attachment) the electronic version of the Form DS-2019.
Please notify OISS immediately, if there are any inaccuracies, so we can amend as needed and re-issue the DS-2019.
Upon receiving an electronically sent DS-2019, download, print, sign, and date the DS-2019 in blue ink.
Read the DS-2019 Frequently Asked Questions from the U.S. Department of State.

3. Pay the SEVIS Fee
You can pay the SEVIS fee via the SEVIS I-901 Fee Processing website.
4. Obtain the J-1 visa stamp
Once you have the DS-2019 from NU, make an appointment at the nearest U.S. Embassy/Consulate for a visa interview.

Please check the Department of State website for current visa wait times at each embassy/consulate.
See the Consular Electronic Application Center for specific requirements.
If while applying for a J-1 visa stamp, the EV's name is sent for a background check, there is very little the university can do. However, if more than 60 days have passed since the date of application, and no information has been given regarding application status, please contact your OISS Advisor.
Note: Canadian citizens do not require a visa stamp.
5. After arrival on campus, you will need to complete Immigration Check-In
You must check in with the Office of International Student and Scholar Services within five days of arriving on campus.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsSteps for Incoming J-1 Student Interns
Steps for Incoming J-1 Student InternsThe process of requesting J-1 Student Intern visa status begins with the host department. View instructions for host departments. Once the NU department has submitted a complete request to the OISS, the OISS advisor will review the documents and will issue the Exchange Visitor (EV) a DS-2019 and DS-7002, which is used to obtain his/her J-1 visa stamp at the U.S. embassy/consulate outside the U.S.
Instructions for incoming student visitors
1. Complete the Exchange Visitor DS-2019 Request and J-1 Student Intern Student Supplement 
Exchange Visitor DS-2019 Request
J-1 Intern Student Supplement
Return the completed forms and associated documents (electronic copies are acceptable) to your host department so the department can submit the complete request to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services.
2. Receive DS-2019 and DS-7002
2. Receive DS-2019 and DS-7002
The Office of International Student and Scholar Services will send your DS-2019 and DS-7002 via email attachment. Both you and your program supervisor will need to print and sign both documents. Instructions will be sent via corresponding email. Please carefully review both documents and notify OISS right away if there are any errors or discrepancies.
3. Pay the SEVIS Fee
You can pay the SEVIS fee via the SEVIS I-901 Fee Processing website.
4. Obtain the J-1 visa stamp
Once you have the DS-2019 and DS-7002 documents from from Northwestern, make an appointment at the nearest U.S. Embassy/Consulate for a visa interview. All J-1 visa stamps must be obtained outside the U.S.
Please check the Department of State website for current visa wait times at each embassy/consulate.
See the Consular Electronic Application Center for specific requirements. Procedures/requirements vary.

If while applying for a J-1 visa stamp, the EV's name is sent for a background check, there is very little the university can do. However, if more than 60 days have passed since the date of application, and no information has been given regarding application status, please follow the instructions on the OISS website regarding Visa Stamp Delay.
Note: Canadian citizens do not require a visa stamp.
5. After arrival, you will need to complete Immigration Check-In

When entering the country, be sure to present the DS-2019, DS-7002 and J-1 visa stamp to the immigration official to ensure you enter in J-1 Student Intern status.
You must check in with the Office of International Student and Scholar Services within five days of arriving on campus.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsJ-1 Scholar Arrival, Orientation & Check-in
J-1 Scholar Arrival, Orientation & Check-inThe following webpage provides both requirements for your arrival and first days in the United States.
J-1 Scholar Orientation 
You are required to complete the J-1 orientation module through our orientation platform, Homebase. Follow the steps provided to you upon initial issuance of your DS-2019 to create your Homebase account. The J-1 orientation covers essential information on topics including:

Understanding the J-1 Exchange Visitor Category
Maintaining immigration status
Resources to assist with your adjustment to life at Northwestern
Once the orientation is completed, including the post-orientation quiz, a certificate of completion will be sent as an attachment to the email address you used to create your Homebase account to access the course. You must complete the J-1 orientation before checking in with the OISS upon arrival in the U.S. The J-1 Orientation Certificate of Completion is a requirement for your OISS immigration check in.
Entry and Arrival
When planning your arrival, remember that you are eligible to enter the country up to 30 days before the start date listed on your DS-2019.
Be sure to present the DS-2019 and J-1 visa stamp to the immigration official to ensure you enter in J-1 status.
After entering the U.S., access your I-94 on the U.S. Customs and Border Protection website, and save it for your records. Learn more about the I-94 Record.
Immigration Check-in for J-1 Scholars sponsored by Northwestern University
Immigration Check-in for J-1 Scholars sponsored by Northwestern University
Within 5 days of arrival to the U.S., please complete required check-in with the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) by emailing the follow to your assigned OISS Scholar Advisor:
Completed J-1 Exchange Visitor Check-in Form
JPEG or PDF of the visa page in your passport
Most recent I-94 Record
J-1 Orientation Certificate of Completion (sent via email attachment upon completion of the J-1 Orientation  course in Homebase)
Email subject: J-1 Scholar Check-in (Last name, First name)
After you have checked in, the OISS will send you an email acknowledging your check-in and other important information. 
Note: J-1 Scholars sponsored by Fulbright do not need to check in with OISS. The U.S. State Department manages SEVIS immigration records for J-1 scholars sponsored by Fulbright.
New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals
If you will be a paid employee of Northwestern University, the New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals will help you understand required steps with OISS, Human Resources, and Payroll.
Social Security
If you are being paid by Northwestern (or any other U.S. institution) you must apply for a Social Security number. You are eligible to apply 10 days after your arrival in the United States.
For application details, visit our webpage on Social Security.Other Steps After ArrivalGet to know the International Office
Take advantage of our advice and guidance. Scholar advisors are assigned based on the hosting department/school at Northwestern. See the OISS Our Staff webpage to determine your assigned Scholar Advisor.Sign up for the OISS Community ListservA “Listserv” is a means of communicating with a group of people via email. The Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) uses the “OISS-Community” listserv to communicate important news and announcements from OISS to the Northwestern Community. To sign up to receive the OISS-Community listserv, please follow the instructions below:  Log in to the email account you want to use to subscribe.
Compose a new PLAIN TEXT email.
Fill in the email as follows:
To: listserv@listserv.it.northwestern.edu
Subject:
Body: SUBSCRIBE OISS-COMMUNITY FirstName LastName
Send Email.  If you experience any issues with subscribing to the OISS-Community listserv, please reach out to intoff@northwestern.edu to be added to the listserv.Get to know your academic departmentMake an effort to get to know your department's administrative contacts, your supervisor, and other colleagues.Visit or contact important offices on campus
Human Resources' Payroll department if you are being paid by Northwestern. You will need to submit necessary paperwork and be entered into the Human Resources database. (This must be completed before you can obtain a WildCARD or set up an email account.)
HR's Benefits department if you will be receiving Northwestern health insurance or the Risk Management website if you will be receiving Visiting Scholar Health Insurance.
WildCARD Office to obtain a WildCARD, Northwestern's ID card. You will need this card to check out library books, use the free shuttle, purchase on-campus food, receive discounts at local shops and restaurants, and do banking (if linked to an USBank account).
Northwestern Information Technology (NUIT) Support Center to set up your email account. Email is free, and it is the University's official form of communication.
Open a bank accountWhether or not you have a social security number, there are a variety of bank options in Evanston/Chicago.Apply for a driver's license and/or familiarize yourself with other transportation optionsOnce you have a Social Security number, you can apply for a driver's license. If you do not have a social security number, you can apply for a temporary driver's license. For application details, visit our Driving and Transportation webpage. Information about campus parking is available on the University Police website.
If you do not drive a car, you have many other transit options, including:
University shuttles
CTA, Chicago trains and buses
Metra, regional commuter trains
Pace, suburban bus system
Read local newspapers and websitesLearn about Northwestern, Evanston, and Chicago and enjoy yourself.

Daily Northwestern, the University's student-run newspaper
PlanIt Purple, Northwestern's official online event calendar
Chicago Tribune, a major Chicago newspaper
Metromix Chicago, a website about Chicago-area events and entertainment
Time Out Chicago, a website about Chicago-area events

HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsVisas for Spouses and Children
Visas for Spouses and ChildrenDependents (husband/wife, and/or unmarried children under the age of 21) of the J-1 Exchange Visitor fall into the J-2 visa category.
Required Documentation
Before J-2 dependents will join the J-1 EV, in the US, you must submit the J-2 Dependent Request Form so that each J-2 can receive a DS-2019 from the International Office.
J-2 Visa Specifics
Health Insurance: All J-1 exchange visitors and their J-2 dependents must maintain health insurance coverage that meets specific requirements. Learn more about these requirements and Northwestern's Visiting Scholar Health Insurance option.
Study: J-2 dependents are eligible for full or part-time study. If a J-2 spouse wishes to enroll in a full-time, degree-seeking program at NU or any other post-secondary institution,  he or she must a change visa status to that of a F-1 or J-1 student.
Employment: J-2 dependents are eligible for full or part-time employment with prior approval from USCIS. See our J-2 Employment Authorization Guide for information on how J-2 dependents can apply for authorization, which includes filing form I-765 with USCIS and receiving the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) card.

In addition, all J-1 visa regulations which apply to the J-1 EV, also apply to the J-2 dependent including the 24-month bar and the 212 (e) home residency requirements.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsExtending or Transferring Status
Extending or Transferring StatusWhen a J-1 Exchange Visitor is reappointed to their current position (extension of program), transfers to another Northwestern department, or transfers to/from an outside institution, OISS must update their DS-2019 accordingly.
Jump to instructions for:

Extensions (reappointment within the same department) 
Internal Transfers (between NU departments) 
External Transfers (to/from an outside institution) 

Extensions
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 extension request for their J-1 Exchange Visitors. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. An extension request contains all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following exceptions:
English proficiency documentation is not required for extension requests.
Copies of all current and previous DS-2019s are required for extension requests.
Internal Transfers
When a J-1 Exchange Visitor moves to a different Northwestern department, the EV’s new host department initiates the DS-2019 request. J-1 EVs must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The new host department must coordinate with the previous host department to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Usually, an internal transfer is accompanied by an extension of the DS-2019. The new host department must submit a request for an extension. When submitting the request to evrequest@northwestern.edu, make a note in the email explaining that the EV is transferring to a new department so OISS can update the department information on the DS-2019 accordingly
External Transfers
External Transfers
For external transfer-in and transfer-out requests, J-1 Exchange Visitors must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The Northwestern host department must coordinate with the external program sponsor to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Transferring to Northwestern
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 transfer-in request for their J-1 EVs. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. A transfer-in request should contain all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following additions:
Complete and attach the J-1 Transfer-in form to the request.
Include all current and previous DS-2019s in the request.

OISS will coordinate with the external program sponsor to schedule the transfer. The DS-2019 is issued on or after the effective date of the transfer, which is the start date of the Northwestern appointment.
Transferring out of Northwestern
When a J-1 EV wishes to transfer to another institution, they must complete the J-1 Early Departure/Transfer Out form and submit to their assigned scholar advisor. OISS will coordinate with the external and current program sponsors to schedule the transfer.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsVisa Compliance & Requirements
Immigration Compliance & RequirementsJ-1 Exchange Visitors (EV) must abide by certain immigration requirements outlined below. There are additional requirements for those in the Student Intern, and Research Scholar or Professor categories.
Funding
J-1 EVs may receive a salary or stipend from various parties. They can receive funding from Northwestern, the government, private organizations, their current place of employment (outside the U.S.), or personal funds, but the funding must meet the current living expense requirements.  This requirement is currently $2,470/month or $29,640/year for a scholar with an additional $610 per month for each dependent (spouse or child). This amount does not include childcare or healthcare costs.
English Language Proficiency
English Language Proficiency
Per Department of State guidelines, J-1 EVs must possess “sufficient proficiency in the English language, as determined by an objective measurement of English language proficiency, successfully to participate in his or her program and to function on a day-to-day basis. A sponsor must verify an applicant's English language proficiency through a recognized English language test, by signed documentation from an academic institution or English language school, or through a documented interview conducted by the sponsor either in-person or by videoconferencing, or by telephone if videoconferencing is not a viable option.”
The purpose of this Department of State requirement serves many purposes, mainly to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the visitor:
The visitor will be able to contact authorities in the event of an emergency and discuss medical treatment with a doctor.
The visitor will not be dependent on others for translation services.
The visitor will be able to be productive and start the program objectives from day one without having to struggle too much with language.
The visitor will have an easier time with day-to-day life. For example, the EV will be able to order meals at a restaurant and if they are a parent, the EV will be able to discuss academic progress or any issues with the school teachers and administrators.

In order to be eligible for J-1 sponsorship, all new EVs will need to provide evidence of English Language Proficiency in one of the following ways:

Copy of a diploma or other signed documentation that confirms the EV earned a degree from an institution of higher education that operates in English
Approved English test score from the past 2 years:
TOEFL score of at least 57 (87 if the visitor will be teaching)
IELTS score of at least 5.5 (7.0 if the visitor will be teaching)
English3 Interview of at least 3 (4 if the visitor will be teaching)
J-Check/iTEP score of at least 3.5 (4.0 if the visitor will be teaching)
Cambridge English score of at least 162 (185 if the visitor will be teaching)


If the EV has lived, worked, or studied in an English speaking country* for two years within the past five years, a verbal interview can be used to evaluate English proficiency. Please see English Proficiency Attestation for interview guidelines.

*The World Factbook has information about languages spoken in each country. Please select the country in question from the menu and look under "People and Societies" for language information.
Northwestern University has partnered with both English3 and J-Check to provide discounted exams. To access the discounted rate, please have your prospective Exchange Visitor follow the steps below:
For English3, complete the interview online and receive the score within 24 hours. The interview takes about 25 minutes. Receive the 30% Northwestern discount by entering the code “TAMUJ130”.

For J-Check testing, please go to J-check for Northwestern University and you will automatically receive the NU discounted rate. After payment, feel free to use the complimentary practice ID to practice the exam before using the official ID and test link to take the exam. You will receive your official grade report within 24 hours of testing. 


Scores should be send to the hosting department after they are received. The hosting department will include the score with the Exchange Visitor request to OISS.
Maintaining J-1 Status
Enter the Country in the Correct J-1 Status
Present your DS-2019 and visa stamp to the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Officer to ensure you are entered in J-1 status correctly.
Even if you have a valid B-1 visa or are eligible for the Visa Waiver Program, it is important that you always enter in J-1 status to maintain your J-1 status. If you do not enter in the correct status, you will need to leave the U.S. and reenter.

Maintain Valid Immigration Documents

Your passport should be valid for at least 6 months into the future at all times.
Your DS-2019 dates should be valid. Apply a DS-2019 extension before the expiration date.
Your visa stamp must be valid for entry into the U.S. Your visa stamp can expire while in the U.S, as the end date on the DS-2019 determines the date you are admitted to the U.S. until.
Access your Electronic I-94 record online each time you enter the U.S.. and save it for your records. The “Admit Until Date” should be listed as “D/S”, which stands for duration of status.
Maintain Accurate Records
If your residential address changes, email your assigned OISS Advisor within 10 days.
30-Day Grace Period

Enter/exit the country within 30-days before/after the program.
You are not allowed to work, conduct research, or transfer your J-1 to another institution during the grace period.

Providing Off-Campus Lectures or Consultations
Generally, J-1 EVs cannot engage in employment outside of their J-1 program. However, occasional off-campus lectures/consultations at other institutions are permitted in some cases.
Occasional lectures or short-term consultations must:

Be directly related to the objectives of the EV’s program;
Be incidental to the EV’s primary program activities;
Not delay the completion date of the EV’s program; and
Be documented in SEVIS.

To engage in occasional lectures or short-term consultations involving wages or other remuneration, the EV must present the following to the OISS:
A letter from the host institution setting forth the terms and conditions of the offer to lecture or consult, including the duration, number of hours, field or subject, amount of compensation, and description of such activity; and
A letter from the EV’s department head or supervisor recommending such activity and explaining how the activity would enhance the EV’s program.

Email your assigned OISS advisor prior to any off-campus lecture/consultation for written approval before the lecture/consultation.
The Two-Year Home Residency Requirement - 212(E)
Certain J-1 EVs are subject to the 212(e) two-year home residency requirement. This requirement is implemented by your home country and upheld as part of U.S. law in the Immigration and Nationality Act, Section 212(e). Your DS-2019 and J-1 visa stamp indicate whether you are subject or not subject to the requirement.
If you are unsure whether you are subject to the 212(e), or if the determinations on your DS-2019 and J-1 visa stamp do not match, contact your OISS Advisor for assistance.
Those subject to 212(e) must spend two years physically present in their country of citizenship or last legal permanent residence. This time does not have to be continuous. 212(e) will apply to your record until the requirement has been fulfilled or waived by the Department of State.
The following EVs are subject to the requirement:
Any EV whose field of study is listed on the State Departments's Exchange Visitor Skills List. Double-check the Skills List even if your documentation does not reflect subjectivity.
Any EV receiving U.S.. or home government funding specifically targeted to sponsor the exchange.
Any EV receiving graduate medical education or training.

Until the requirement is fulfilled:

You are not eligible for an immigrant visa or for adjustment of status to lawful permanent resident (immigrant/green card) status.


You are not eligible for an H visa (temporary workers and dependents), an L visa (intracompany transferees and dependents), or a K visa (fiancé and dependents).
You are not eligible to change their nonimmigrant status within the United States to any other nonimmigrant category except to:



A (diplomatic)


G (international organization)


T (victim of human trafficking)


U (victims of qualifying criminal activity) or
T (victim of human trafficking)


U (victims of qualifying criminal activity) or


H-1B for J physicians receiving waivers on the basis of the recommendation of a state or federal agency        interested in facilitating the physician's H-1B employment in a federally designated shortage area.






Applying for a 212(e) Waiver 
EVs who are subject 212(e) can apply to waive the requirement. The waiver process is initiated and filed by the exchange visitor, not by the Office of International Student and Scholar Services. More information on this waiver process can be found on the Department of State's website.
Important notes about the 212(e) waiver:
Ineligibility for J-1 DS-2019extension: Once you receive a written waiver recommendation from the U.S. Department of State, you cannot extend the current end date of your DS-2019.
Transferring a J-1 program after receiving a waiver: While not recommended, if you are a J-1 scholar at another institution who has already received the 212e waiver but would like to transfer your record to Northwestern, it is possible to transfer the J-1 provided the end date remains the same on the current DS-2019.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsTravel and Early Departure
Travel and Early DepartureThe OISS must be notified in certain cases when a J-1 Exchange Visitor intends to travel outside the United States temporarily or is leaving the U.S. because their J-1 program ended early.
Travel Outside the U.S.
J-1 Exchange Visitors traveling outside the U.S. for brief periods of 30 days or less do not need to notify OISS. Required documents and other considerations for international travel can be found under F-1 and J-1 Travel.
For Travel that Exceeds 30 Days
J-1 Exchange Visitors in the Research Scholar or Professor categories traveling outside the U.S. for more than 30 days must complete the J-1 Out of U.S. Request form and return to their assigned scholar advisor, who will create an Out of Country Record in SEVIS. To maintain valid J-1 status while out of the country, the EV must:
Maintain J-1 program objectives while outside of the U.S. and resume their objectives upon return to the U.S. 
Maintain their active health insurance and Northwestern appointment for the duration of the travels.  
Communicate with the OISS and the Northwestern department, reporting any changes while out of the country.
Remember to obtain a valid travel signature, necessary for re-entry into the U.S. in valid J-1 status.

Note: OISS cannot extend the out of country period once the return date has passed. Please notify us in advance if plans change.
Early Departure
The J-1 Early Departure/Transfer Out form must be completed and submitted to the OISS when the J-1 Exchange Visitor:

Completes their J-1 program 15 or more days early.
Changes to another immigration status (H-1B, LPR, etc.).
HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B Employees
H-1B EmployeesH-1B status is suitable for most international researchers, faculty and staff whose position requires the minimum of a bachelor’s degree and who will perform work in a specialized skill area. The host department will collect information from the prospective H-1B and file documents to the International Office who will then file the petition to USCIS.
Visa summary:

Visa-holders are skilled workers with a bachelor's degree or higher who perform work in a specialized skill area.
Visas can be held up to six years total, but can only be applied for three years at a time.
Dependents of the H-1B beneficiary hold H-4 visas.
Types of H-1B Visa Applications
There are several different types of H-1B visa applications depending on the current status of the prospective employee.  See the Documentation Requirements for H-1B Application Types to view the differences at a glance.
In general, the type of H-1B visa will depend on whether you are a new or current H-B visa-holder.Applying for an initial H-1B visaWill you be applying for an initial H-1B? New applicants fall into one of the two following H-1B types:

H-1B Overseas are new applicants living outside the United States
H-1B COS (Change of Status) currently live in the United States in a different visa category

 Application procedures & checklistsExtending or amending an H-1BIf you currently hold an H-1B visa, but something is changing such as your host institution, end date, job details or similar, one of the following types for H-1B visa applications will be prepared:
H-1B COE (Change of Employer) holds an H-1B at another institution but are starting employment at Northwestern
H-1B EOS (Extension of Status) hold an H-1B at Northwestern and would like to extend end date
H-1B Amend hold an H-1B at Northwestern but job title, description, site of activity, salary, and/or hours have changed.
H-1B Concurrent hold an H-1B at another institution but will concurrently work at Northwestern.
Amendment procedures & checklistsMaintaining Your Visa
It is important that you maintain your H-1B status by extending/amending your visa if necessary, and by following the visa's compliance requirements. View all visa requirements and restrictions.
Bringing Spouses and Children
Spouses and children under age 21 will fall in the H-4 visa category. This category carries certain restrictions, such as ineligibility to seek employment. Learn about H-4 visas and find application instructions.
HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B EmployeesDocumentation Requirements
Documentation RequirementsReview the documentation required for each type of H-1B visa application.Current (Pre-Application) StatusOutside of the U.S.
 Application type:  H-1B Overseas
Employment eligibility documentation required: UCSIS Approval Notice Note: If the intended start date approaches and the Approval Notice has not been received from USCIS, the NU hiring department will suspend employment until it has been received.
Dependent documentation required: No additional paperwork required; dependents apply for H-4 visa using H-1B supporting documents.
Already in the U.S. in a different visa category
Application type: H-1B COS (Change of Status)
Employment eligibility documentation required: UCSIS Approval Notice Note: If the intended start date approaches and the Approval Notice has not been received from USCIS, the NU hiring department will suspend employment until it has been received.
Dependent documentation required: Dependent will file form I-539 to change, transfer or extend status.Note: For assistance completing this form, review our I-539 Guidelines page.
Transferring to Northwestern; holds an H-1B with another institution
Application type:  H-1B COE (Change of Employer)
Employment eligibility documentation required: UCSIS Receipt NoticeNote: If the intended start date approaches and the Approval Notice has not been received from USCIS, portability provisions allow employment to begin/continue at NU based on the receipt of the Receipt Notice from USCIS.
Dependent documentation required: Dependent will file form I-539 to change, transfer or extend status.Note: For assistance completing this form, review our I-539 Guidelines page.
Holds an H-1B with Northwestern and would like to extend end date
Application type:  H-1B EOS (Extension of Status)
Application type:  H-1B EOS (Extension of Status)
Employment eligibility documentation required: UCSIS Receipt NoticeNote: If the intended start date approaches and the Approval Notice has not been received from USCIS, portability provisions allow employment to begin/continue at NU based on the receipt of the Receipt Notice from USCIS.
Dependent documentation required: Dependent will file form I-539 to change, transfer or extend status.Note: For assistance completing this form, review our I-539 Guidelines page.
Holds an H-1B with Northwestern and is being promoted, changing position, etc.
Application type:  H-1B Amend
Employment eligibility documentation required: UCSIS Receipt NoticeNote: If the intended start date approaches and the Approval Notice has not been received from USCIS, portability provisions allow employment to begin/continue at NU based on the receipt of the Receipt Notice from USCIS.
Dependent documentation required: If the amendment includes an extension, the dependent will file form I-539.
Holds an H-1B with another institution but will collaborate with Northwestern for stipend/salary
Application type:  H-1B Concurrent
Employment eligibility documentation required: UCSIS Receipt NoticeNote: If the intended start date approaches and the Approval Notice has not been received from USCIS, portability provisions allow employment to begin/continue at NU based on the receipt of the Receipt Notice from USCIS.
Dependent documentation required: Dependents should be maintained on the primary employer's H-1B.
HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B EmployeesApply for an Initial H-1B
Apply for an Initial H-1BAbout Processing TimesH-1B requests may be submitted up to 6 months before the start date but no earlier. Please keep in mind OISS and USCIS processing times are subject to change based on processing volume.
Internal processing at the OISS (before sending to USCIS) requires 3 months. This processing time cannot be expedited as it is necessary to complete the Prevailing Wage Determination and Labor Condition Application requirements.
External processing (once petition is sent to USCIS) requires 3 weeks to issue a Receipt Notice.
All initial H-1B petitions REQUIRE a premium processing request which expedites the receipt of the Approval Notice to approximately 15 business days (regular processing is approximately 6 months).
Overseas and Change of Status applicants will need to apply for an initial H-1B.
The OISS only accepts H-1B requests from NU sponsoring departments, so any application should begin with the applicant speaking with his or her department, which will initiate the process with the OISS. All initial H-1B petitions will require a premium processing request from your department.
Instructions for Host Departments
Instructions for Incoming H-1B Beneficiary
Instructions for Host Departments
Instructions for Incoming H-1B Beneficiary
1. Submit required documentation to your host department.
Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the OISS.
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
Credential evaluation, if you got your degree outside the U.S. Recommended evaluation companies include: Educational Perspectives (office located in Chicago) Evaluation Service, Inc.; World Education Services (WES); Educational Credential Evaluators (ECE); One Earth International Credential Evaluators

If you once held a J-1 visa:


Copies of proof of J-1 status such as J1 visa stamp(s), DS-2019(s)


If you are subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement:

Copy of waiver recommendation AND
Copy of I-612; OR
Proof that you fulfilled the requirements by living and working in your home country for a full two years

If you once held H-1B visa status:

Copy of all previous H-1B Approval Notices

If you are changing your status within the U.S. and you have dependents in the U.S. with you:

Submit the I-539 form and associated documents
Submit the I-539 form and associated documents

2. Complete the online questionnaire in Docketwise.
The OISS will send you login information after your sponsoring department has submitted a complete request.
3. Receive receipt notice and approval notice.
All initial H-1B applicants (overseas and Change of Status) must receive the Approval Notice from USCIS before employment in H-1B status at Northwestern can begin.
Within approximately two to three weeks after filing with USCIS and submitting the petition with premium processing request, the OISS Front Desk emails you, your department contact, and Payroll confirming the receipt of the application and then the decision made by USCIS. 
If you are in the U.S. at the time, the Approval Notice and supporting documents can be picked up at the OISS. If you are outside of Evanston/Chicago area, please reach out to your department, so they can arrange for your Approval packet to be shipped to you.
4. Apply for the H-1B visa at a US Consulate or Embassy.
If you are an overseas H-1B applicant, make an appointment with a US Consulate/Embassy nearest to your place of residence. Please be aware that it may take a few weeks to get an appointment. Allow additional time: two to three months if a background check is deemed necessary by the consular official.
Please check the US Consulate/Embassy website for any additional documents required by an individual consular post. Supporting documentation for the visa appointment can be found in the approval packet provided to you by the OISS.
Note: If while applying for an H-1B visa stamp, you are subject to a background check or administrative processing, there is very little the university can do to expedite this process. However, if more than 60-days have passed since the date of application, and no information has been given regarding application status, please follow the instructions on the OISS website regarding Visa Stamp Delay.
5. Arrival and check-in.
Overseas applicants must check in with the OISS and University Payroll Office prior to starting work. Please note that if you are arriving from outside the US, you may only enter 10 days before your H-1B start date.
Change of Status applicants must retrieve the Approval Notice documents from the OISS and present the original to University Payroll prior to starting employment in H-1B status.
HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B EmployeesExtend or Amend a H-1B
Extend or Amend a H-1BThe procedures for making the following changes are provided on this webpage. View Instructions for Host Department

H-1B COE (Change of Employer) hold an H-1B at another institution but will be hired by Northwestern.
H-1B EOS (Extension) hold an H-1B at Northwestern but will extend employment end-date (all other employment information remains the same)
H-1B Amend hold an H-1B at Northwestern but need to change details such as site of activity, job title, job description, salary, or hours worked.

Although the steps and materials required may vary slightly, the basic procedure is the same:
Although the steps and materials required may vary slightly, the basic procedure is the same:

The H-1B applicant will submit required forms and documentation to the host department. The host department will complete its own required forms and submit the entire packet to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services.
The applicant will receive an invitation via email  to complete an online questionnaire in Docketwise.
The OISS will handle Prevailing Wage Determination and Labor Condition Application requirements.
The OISS will prepare the petition and submit it to USCIS.
After receiving USCIS Receipt Notice, the H-1B applicant may begin/continue work at Northwestern.
The OISS requests that documentation be submitted to our office 3 months in advance of the desired effective date for all requests. Consult your OISS advisor regarding cases that require an expedited timeline.
 While the Receipt Notice is required for work to continue/begin at Northwestern for COE/Extension/Amend cases, the Approval Notice is required for all international travel. Please communicate with your OISS advisor about any upcoming international travel plans.
Questions? Contact the Office of International Student and Scholar Services or departmental contact.
Instructions for H-1B BeneficiaryChange of Employer (COE) to NorthwesternH-1B ExtensionAmended H-1BChange of Employer (COE) to NorthwesternOpenClose1. Submit the following required documentation to your host department:
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
Credential evaluation, if you received your degree outside the U.S. Recommended evaluation companies include: Educational Perspectives (office located in Chicago), Evaluation Service, Inc.; World Education Services (WES); Educational Credential Evaluators (ECE); One Earth Credential Evaluators
Copy of H-1B visa stamp
Copy of I-94 record (If you will travel internationally between submitting your I-94 record to OISS and receipt of H-1B approval, please alert your OISS Advisor before confirming your trip.) 
Copy of W2
Copies of all previous H-1B approval notices
Three most recent pay stubs from current employer (wait for your IO advisor to request these via email)
An employment letter from your current employer, including recent date and confirming employment start date
If you once held a J-1 visa: Copies of J-1 visa stamps or DS-2019 to prove J-1 status
If you once held a J-1 visa: Copies of J-1 visa stamps or DS-2019 to prove J-1 status
If you were subject to 212(e): Copy of waiver recommendation and copy of 1-612 OR proof that the 2 years has been fulfilled
Optional: $2500 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by hiring department).
2. Complete the online questionnaire in Docketwise.
The OISS will send you an invitation via email to fill out the Docketwise questionnaire (called a "smart form") after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS. Only fill out questions you believe apply to you. Your OISS advisor will reach out if additional information is needed.
3. Both you and your department contact will receive emails when the OISS receives a request, when the OISS sends the petition to USCIS, and when OISS receives the Receipt and Approval Notices.
Please note: Your USCIS Receipt Notice is needed before you can start work at NU. If the intended employment start-date approaches and you do not have a Receipt Notice, the NU hiring department will have to delay employment. 
Dependents and Form I-539
If this application includes an extension, the H-1B beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539 should be included in this H-1B extension filing. If there is no request to extend the beneficiary's end date, then an I-539 may not be necessary.H-1B ExtensionOpenClose1. Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the OISS.
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
Copies of all previous H-1B approval notices
Three most recent pay stubs from Northwestern (wait for your IO advisor to request these via email)
Copy of visa stamp
Copy of I-94 record (If you will travel internationally between submitting your I-94 record to OISS and receipt of H-1B approval, please alert your OISS Advisor before confirming your trip.) 
If you once held a J-1 visa: Copies of J-1 visa stamps or DS-2019 to prove J-1 status
If you were subject to 212(e): Copy of waiver recommendation and copy of 1-612 OR proof that the 2 years has been fulfilled
Optional: $2500 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by hiring department).
2. Complete the online questionnaire in Docketwise.
The OISS will send you an invitation via email to fill out the Docketwise questionnaire (called a "smart form") after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS. Only fill out questions you believe apply to you. Your OISS advisor will reach out if additional information is needed.
3. Both you and your department contact will receive emails when the OISS receives a request, when the OISS sends the petition to USCIS, and when OISS receives the Receipt and Approval Notices.
Please note: Your USCIS Receipt Notice is needed before you continue working at NU. If your current H-1B end-date passes and you do not have a Receipt Notice the NU hiring department will have to delay employment. 
Dependents and Form I-539
The H-1B beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539, including the following documents, should be included in this H-1B extension filing.
Completed form I-539 and I-539A (if there is more than one dependent, each additional dependent needs to complete an I-539A)
Copy of dependent(s) visa stamp page
Copy of dependent(s) passport biographical page
Copy of dependent(s) previous H-4 approval notice(s)
Printout of dependent(s) I-94
$370 fee check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (payable by your or your department)
Copy of marriage certificate for spouse and/or birth certificate(s) for children. Include both original and English translation.
Amended H-1BOpenCloseIf the only change will be an increase/decrease in salary, please contact your assigned OISS Advisor so that we can evaluate if an H-1B Amendment is necessary.
If your position will change (e.g. new job title, new job description, new site of activity, promotion, transfer to another NU department, different hours per week), you are required to submit H-1B Amendment paperwork and receive a USCIS Receipt Notice before any change occurs.
1. Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the OISS.
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
Three most recent pay stubs from Northwestern (wait for your OISS advisor to request these via email)
Copies of all H-1B Approval Notices
Copy of visa stamp
Copy of I-94 record (If you will travel internationally between submitting your I-94 record to OISS and receipt of H-1B approval, please alert your OISS Advisor before confirming your trip.) 
If you once held a J-1 visa: Copies of J-1 visa stamps or DS-2019 to prove J-1 status
If you were subject to 212(e): Copy of waiver recommendation and copy of 1-612 OR proof that the 2 years has been fulfilled
Optional: $2500 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by hiring department).
2. Complete the online questionnaire in Docketwise.
The OISS will send you an invitation via email to fill out the Docketwise questionnaire (called a "smart form") after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS. Only fill out questions you believe apply to you. Your OISS advisor will reach out if additional information is needed.
3. Both you and your department contact will receive emails when the OISS receives a request, when the OISS sends the petition to USCIS, and when OISS receives the Receipt Notice and Approval Notices.
Note: The USCIS Receipt Notice is needed before the change proposed in the petition can take place.
Dependents and Form I-539
If this application includes an extension, the H-1B beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents status. This I-539 should be included in this H-1B extension filing. If there is no request to extend the beneficiary's end date, then an I-539 may not be necessary.About Processing Times
H-1B requests can be submitted up to 6 months before the start date, but no earlier. Please keep in mind OISS and USCIS processing times are subject to change based on processing volume.
Internal processing at the OISS (before sending to USCIS) for Extensions, Change of Employer and Amended H-1B petitions require 3 months, and no less than 4 weeks. Anything less might require a delay in the start date, and/or a break in employment. All initial H-1B requests will require 3 months.
External processing (once petition is sent to USCIS) requires 3 weeks to issue a receipt notice. Regular processed petitions will take up to 6 months for an Approval notice to be issued, or the department can pay for a Premium Processed request, which will result in adjudication within 15 business days.

 Please see Visas, fees and Processing Times page for further details.
Please see Visas, fees and Processing Times page for further details.

HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B EmployeesH-1B Visa Compliance & Requirements
H-1B Visa Compliance & RequirementsMaintaining visa status
Address Updates
If you change your residential address, please update this information with USCIS using form AR-11. Information can be found on USCIS website.
For Incoming H-1B Applicants Outside the U.S.

Beneficiaries may enter the U.S. up to 10 days before the start date on his/her H-1B Approval Notice.
H-1B visa holders coming to NU from outside the U.S. need to check-in with the appropriate OISS Advisor within 5 days of arrival to Northwestern.
To check-in with OISS: Please send an email to your OISS Advisor with the following items attached: I-94 Record and jpeg image or PDF of H-1B entry stamp in your passport.
For H-1B Visa-Holders Seeking Extension 
It is important to maintain your H-1B status by applying for an H-1B extension in a timely manner. Please communicate with your current supervisor/department about your H-1B extension and keep the following points in mind to during the extension process:
If you have dependents in the U.S. please remember to file Form I-539 form to extend their H-4 status.
If you are approaching your 5th year in H-1B status, and you intend to apply for Permanent Resident status in the U.S., please begin the process through NU (if eligible) or independently, prior to the start of your 5th year. This will allow extension of H-1B status beyond six years (while pending) for one year at a time.
Travel While in H-1B Status
Travel While in H-1B Status
For beneficiaries currently in the US, please consult your OISS advisor regarding all plans to travel outside the US before the anticipated approval of your petition. Leaving the US while a change of status, extension, amendment, or change of employer petition is pending approval by USCIS may be considered abandonment of the petition or  result in additional visa processing delays and employment disruption. We can coordinate the submission of your petition to accommodate your travel plans with advanced notice.
Please inform your sponsoring department and the OISS if you are traveling outside the U.S. during the process. Review the H-1B travel restrictions.
Off-Campus Occasional Lectures
Off-Campus Occasional Lectures
H-1B beneficiaries are eligible to be issued reimbursement for transportation and reasonable incidental expenses incurred while traveling to off-campus lectures but s/he is not approved to be paid a wage, salary or honorarium for these services. Please contact an OISS advisor for more information and for an approval letter.
Departure
A Departure Notice is required for the following situations:
Completed employment on the approval notice end date
Resigned early
Dismissed/terminated
Obtained a different visa status

Upon completion of Northwestern employment or H-1B status, please submit the H-1B Departure Notice to our office.

HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B EmployeesVisas for Spouses and Children
Visas for H-1B DependentsSpouses and unmarried minor children (under 21 years of age) of an H-1B alien are eligible for H-4 status.
Visa Requirements
Study: H-4 dependents are eligible for full-time and part-time study.
Employment: H-4 nonimmigrants are not authorized to be employed incident to status. However, certain H-4 dependent spouses of H-1B nonimmigrants who are seeking employment-based lawful permanent resident (LPR) status are permitted to apply to USCIS for an Employment Authorization Document (EAD) that will allow them to work in the United States. H-4 dependent spouses of H-1B nonimmigrants are eligible to apply for an EAD under this rule only if their H-1B spouse is the principal beneficiary of an approved Form I-140, Immigrant Petition for Alien Worker.

USCIS has developed FAQs regarding the H-4 Employment Rule



Required Documentation
Required Documentation

Applying for an Overseas H-1B: Dependents do not need to file additional documentation. Dependents use H-1B supporting documentation (e.g. I-797 Approval Notice, proof of continued employment, etc.) to apply for the H-4 visa and do not receive their own Approval Notices.
Extending or changing status: It is the responsibility of the H-1B beneficiary and the H-4 dependent to maintain the H-4 status. The dependent must file Form I-539 to change his/her status in any way, including changing to a different visa category, extending the H-4 end-date, or documenting the beneficiary's change of employer.
Travel: When traveling, H-4 dependents should carry with him/her a copy of the H-1B Approval Notice, copy of the H-1B petition most recently submitted to USCIS, as well as any other relevant documents related to H-4 status (Approval Notice, H-4 visa stamp, letter from hiring department confirming employment) and a valid passport.
Please review the our guidelines and tips for filing the I-539. You may submit this form to the OISS for review or you may choose to file it yourself.

HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B EmployeesH-1B Employee Check-in
H-1B Employee Check-inUseful LinksSocial Security
Travel for H1-B Visa Holders
Extend or Amend a H-1B
New Employee Checklist for Foreign NationalsThis webpage provides guidance on your transition to an H-1B visa holder at Northwestern University.
Check-in with OISS
For H-1B employees arriving from overseas
For overseas (consular) applicants, within 5 days of your H-1B start date as indicated on your I-797 Approval Notice, please complete required check-in with OISS by emailing the following to your assigned OISS Scholar Advisor:  Email subject: H-1B Scholar Check-in (Last name, First name)

JPEG of PDF of the visa page in your passport
Image of admission stamp in your passport (if given) 
Most recent I-94 Record
For H-1B employees already in the U.S.
For change of status, change of employer (transfer), and extension applicants, OISS will contact you when your I-797 Approval Notice is ready for pick up or shipping to your residential address. There are no additional steps to check in with our office.
* Note:  If you change status to H-1B while remaining in the U.S. or transfer your H-1B to Northwestern, your I-797 Approval Notice will contain a new I-94 record at the bottom. This I-94 record will replace your previous record and show your new nonimmigrant status (H-1B) and dates of valid status in the US. The eleven-digit I-94 number is the same number you were given when you last entered the U.S. The I-94 record on the U.S. Customs and Border Protection I-94 website will not update unless you depart from the US and physically re-enter in H-1B status. You should use the paper I-94 record showing your status as H-1B if you are asked to provide your I-94 record.
Update your address with USCIS
Update your address with USCIS
Update your local U.S. address with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. H-1B visa holders must notify USCIS directly of any change of home address by completing Form AR-11 within 10 days of moving.
Complete the New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals
The New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals will help you understand required steps with OISS, Human Resources, and Payroll.
Sign-up to receive the OISS Community Listserv
Stay connected and informed with the Office of International Student and Scholar Services through our OISS-Community Listserv for communications with the campus community. By subscribing, you'll receive OISS news and updates via email. For instruction on how to subscribe, go to OISS Community Listserv.
Obtain your Northwestern Wildcard (I.D. Card)
Submit your photo online and book an appointment to pick up your Wildcard at the Evanston or Chicago Wildcard Office. The Wildcard provides various privileges and access around campus including shuttle transportation, library access, building access, and more.
Apply for an Illinois Driver's License and/or familiarize yourself with other transportation options:
See our Driving and Transportation webpage for detailed information and related resources.
Get to know the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS)
Take advantage of our advice and guidance. Scholar advisors are assigned based on the hosting department/school at Northwestern. See the OISS Our Staff webpage to determine your assigned Scholar Advisor.
HomeInternational ScholarsCanadian & Mexican Nationals (TN)
Canadian & Mexican Nationals (TN)Extensions & Dependents
For information about extending the TN Visa, visit the TN  Extension page.
Find visa Information for family/dependents of TN employees
Created under NAFTA and continuing under the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), this category facilitates the entry of qualified citizens from Canada and Mexico to temporarily engage in professional business activities.  Eligible employees can be admitted to the U.S. in TN status in increments of up to 3 years at a time.
They can come for the following purposes:

Working for a U.S. employer as a professional.
Working for a foreign employer (including even a non-Canadian or non-Mexican employer) to provide pre-arranged professional services to a U.S. employer.
Occupations listed in USMCA Chapter 16 Appendix 2 qualify for employment under USMCA and must meet the minimum qualification for each profession, as listed.
Eligibility

Must be a citizen of Canada or Mexico.
Must possess the qualification and necessary license as per the designated occupation.
Degree must have been earned from institutions located in Canada, Mexico or the U.S.; if not, a credential evaluation must be done for equivalency.
Employment must be temporary and cannot be used to bring tenure-line faculty.
Position must be NU benefits-eligible and paid.
To view instructions for the host department, visit the TN Steps for Host Department webpage.
Steps for Incoming TN Employees
Incoming employees must present documents upon entering the country.
Canadian Citizens
1. Present the following documents to an immigration officer:
Present these at the border if driving or to an officer at the pre-flight inspection facility located at any of the three major Canadian airports (Montreal, Ottawa and Toronto):

Valid Canadian passport
Evidence of required qualifications (diploma, license, transcripts, etc.)
Invitation/employment letter from NU department
$50 filing fee (must be in U.S. dollars)
2. The Port of Entry officer will approve or deny your TN status.
If approved at the the border, you will be entered in TN status. The electronic I-94 record will note the date of entry and name of employer.
Please remember: Canadian citizens are visa exempt and need not apply for a visa at a U.S. consulate.
Mexican Citizens
1. Apply for a TN visa.
Present the following documents to a consular officer at a U.S. consulate in Mexico at the time of the visa application.

Valid Mexican passport
Evidence of required qualifications (diploma, license, transcripts, etc.)
Employment letter from hiring department

2. Receive TN visa stamp from U.S. embassy/consulate.
Travel and enter the U.S. in TN status.  After you enter, your electronic I-94 record will note the date of entry and name of employer.
HomeInternational ScholarsCanadian & Mexican Nationals (TN)TN Extension
TN ExtensionTN status can be renewed for an indefinite period (in up to 3 year increments) as long as the original terms of employment still exist. 
Once OISS files an extension and gets a receipt notice, the beneficiary is eligible to continue employment without a gap.
Ways to Extend TN Status
There are two ways to extend TN status:
1. Travel to Canada/Mexico and re-enter again in TN status (recommended option).
A TN employee can be extend his or her status by departing and re-entering the U.S. This will include submitting a TN Visa Request Form and an employment letter to the International Office. Read more about the requirements for this letter.
2.  Apply for a TN extension within the U.S.
Applying for a TN extension within the U.S. requires 3-4 months for USCIS approval.  All requests must be made to OISS four months prior to the current expiration date of the TN.
Please follow these steps:
The TN employee should initiate this process with the Host Department
Host Department should email the OISS advisor with all of the documents required for the initial TN request
Host Department must also submit appropriate petition fee for Form I-129
OISS will review for accuracy and completeness. If complete, OISS will file form I-129 with USCIS.

OISS will receive receipt notice and forward it to the department.


OISS will receive the Approval Notice from USCIS once processed. Note: processing time varies, but it usually takes three months.


OISS will notify the beneficiary, the host department, and payroll.


Extending Dependent Status

If the principal TN seeks readmission through travel outside the U.S., then the TD must accompany the principal to gain status.
To maintain status in the U.S., the TD must file for an extension with the principal TN by filing form I-539 along with the Form I-129 petition.
HomeInternational ScholarsCanadian & Mexican Nationals (TN)Visas for Spouses and Children
Visas for Spouses and ChildrenDependents of a TN visa-holder will be admitted in TD status. They must apply for a TD visa at a U.S. consulate or embassy nearest to their location of residence. Find resources for international spouses and families.
Activities in TD Status

Study: TD dependents may study full- or part-time.
Employment: TD dependents are not eligible for employment.

HomeInternational ScholarsAustralian National Employees (E-3)
Australian National Employees (E-3)The E-3 specialty occupation visa category is for Australian nationals (AN).
Visa summary:
Visa-holders are skilled workers with a bachelor's degree or higher.
Visas can be held for an unlimited amount of time. The initial visa and extensions have 2-year increments.
The OISS only accepts E-3 requests from NU sponsoring departments, which must confirm sponsorship of an E-3 before an AN can apply.
Dependents of the E-3 beneficiary hold E-3 dependent visa status. Read more on Visas For Spouses and Children.
Types of E-3 Visa ApplicationsThere are several different types of E-3 visas, depending on whether you are a new or current E-3 visa-holder.
Applying for an Initial E-3 VisaInitial E-3 applications are for Australian nationals (AN) outside the U.S. and those currently in the U.S. in other visa categories such as F-1, J-1, B1/B2, etcApplication procedures and checklistsExtending or Amending an E-3If you are an E-3 beneficiary who needs to update your status in some way, you will fall into one of the following E-3 types:
E-3 COE (Change of Employer) are transferring to Northwestern from another institution.
E-3 EOS (Extension) would like to extend employment end-date
E-3 Amend hold an E-3 at Northwestern but need to change details such as job title, job description, salary, or hours worked.
Amendment procedures and checklistsRequirements for Maintaining Visa Status
Initial E-3 beneficiaries from outside the U.S. must check in with OISS upon arrival in the U.S. to start your position. Read more about required documentation.
You will need to abide by certain travel restrictions.
HomeInternational ScholarsAustralian National Employees (E-3)Apply for an Initial E3
Apply for an Initial E3The OISS only accepts E-3 requests from NU sponsoring departments, so any E-3 application should begin with the E-3 applicant speaking with his or her sponsoring department; once the department has confirmed its sponsorship, the Australian National (AN) can apply. See these host department steps.
Petitions can only be started 8 months prior to the employment start date. OISS processing times are subject to change based on processing volume.
Instructions for Incoming E-3 Beneficiaries
1. Submit required documentation to your host department.
Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the OISS.
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
Credential evaluation Recommended evaluation companies include: Evaluation Service, Inc.; World Education Services (WES); Educational Credential Evaluators (ECE)

If you once held a J-1 visa and are subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement:

Copy of waiver recommendation
Copy of I-612

If you once held an E-3:

Copies of all past E-3 approval notices
If you once held an E-3:

Copies of all past E-3 approval notices

2. Complete the online questionnaire in Law Logix.
The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) will send you necessary login information to Law Logix (ww8.welcomeclient.com) after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS.
3. Make a visa appointment at a U.S. Consulate/Embassy to obtain your E-3 visa.
After processing, you will be sent required documentation for visa appointment.
You can obtain E-3 visas for your dependents at this time.
4. Arrival and check-in.
You are required to check-in at the Office of International Student and Scholar Services prior to starting work.

HomeInternational ScholarsAustralian National Employees (E-3)Extend or Amend an E-3
Extend or Amend an E-3The procedures for making the following changes are provided on this webpage.
E-3 COE (Change of Employer) are transferring to Northwestern from another institution.
E-3 EOS (Extension) would like to extend employment end-date
E-3 Amend hold an E-3 at Northwestern but need to change details such as job title, job description, salary, or hours worked.

 To view the steps the host department must take to change a visa, visit the Instructions for Host Departments page.
Instructions for E-3 BeneficiaryChange of Employer (COE) to NorthwesternE-3 ExtensionAmended E-3Change of Employer (COE) to NorthwesternOpenClose1. Submit the following required documentation to your host department:
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
Credential evaluation. Recommended evaluation companies include: Evaluation Service, Inc.; World Education Services (WES); Educational Credential Evaluators (ECE)
If you once held a J-1 visa and are subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement: Copy of waiver recommendation and copy of I-612
Copy of W2
Three most recent pay stubs from current employer (wait for your OISS advisor to request these via email)
An employment letter from your current employer, including recent date and confirming employment start date
Copies of all E-3 approval notices
Optional: $2500 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by beneficiary or department).
2. Complete the online questionnaire in Law Logix.
The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) will send you necessary login information to Law Logix (ww8.welcomeclient.com) after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS.
Addressing Dependents
If this application includes an extension, the E-3 beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents status. This I-539 should be included in this E-3 extension filing. If there is no request to extend the beneficiary's end date, then an I-539 is not necessary.E-3 ExtensionOpenClose1. Submit the following required documentation to your host department:
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
If you once held a J-1 visa and are subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement: Copy of waiver recommendation and copy of I-612
Three most recent pay stubs from Northwestern (wait for your OISS advisor to request these via email)
Copies of all E-3 approval notices
Copy of visa stamp
Copy of I-94 record
Optional: $2500 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by beneficiary or department).

2. Complete the online questionnaire in Law Logix.
The International Office (OISS) will send you necessary login information to Law Logix (ww8.welcomeclient.com) after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS.
Addressing Dependents
The E-3 beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539, including the following documents, should be included in this E-3 extension filing.

Completed form I-539
Copy of dependent(s) visa stamp page
Copy of dependent(s) passport biographical page
Printout of dependent(s) I-94
$370 fee check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (payable by you or your department)
Copy of marriage certificate for spouse and/or birth certificate(s) for children. Include both original and English translation.
Amended E-3OpenCloseIf the only change will be an increase/decrease in salary, please contact your assigned OISS Advisor so that we can evaluate if an E-3 Amendment is necessary.
If a re-filing is necessary, complete the steps listed below.
1. Submit the following required documentation to your host department:
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
If you once held a J-1 visa and are subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement: Copy of waiver recommendation and copy of I-612
Three most recent pay stubs from Northwestern (wait for your OISS advisor to request these via email)
Copies of all E-3 approval notices
Copy of visa stamp
Printout of I-94

2. Complete the online questionnaire in Law Logix.
 The International Office (OISS) will send you necessary login information to Law Logix (ww8.welcomeclient.com) after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS.
Addressing Dependents
The E-3 beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539, including the following documents, should be included in this E-3 extension filing.
Completed form I-539
Copy of dependent(s) visa stamp page
Copy of dependent(s) passport biographical page
Printout of dependent(s) I-94
$370 fee check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (payable by you or your department)
Copy of marriage certificate for spouse and/or birth certificate(s) for children. Include both original and English translation.

HomeInternational ScholarsAustralian National Employees (E-3)Visas for Spouses and Children
Visas for Spouses and ChildrenBringing Spouses and Family Members
Dependents (husband/wife, and/or unmarried children under the age of 21) of E-3 beneficiaries fall into the E-3 dependent category. When E-3 dependent children reach the age of 21 years old, they will "age out" of the E-3 dependent visa category and will have to obtain their own visa status in an appropriate category.
Activities in E-3 Dependent Status
Study: E-3 dependents are eligible for full-time and part-time study.
Employment: E-3 dependents are eligible for full or part time employment with an Employment Authorization Document Card (EAD). E-3 dependents must complete the form I-765 for E-3 dependent employment authorization.

Required Documentation

Applying for an initial E-3: Dependents do not need to file additional documentation. Dependents use E-3 supporting documentation to apply for the visa and do not receive their own Approval Notices).
Extending or changing status: The dependent must file Form I-539 to change his/her status in any way, including changing to a different visa category, extending the E-3 end-date, or documenting the beneficiary's change of employer.

Please review the our guidelines and tips for filing the I-539. You may submit this form to the OISS for review or you may choose to file it yourself.
HomeInternational ScholarsExtraordinary Individuals (O-1)
Individuals with Extraordinary Ability or Achievement (O-1)O-1 status is suitable for individuals who have attained national or international acclaim for extraordinary achievements in the sciences, arts, education, business or athletics.
Visa summary:

O-1 Visa-holders must:

Possess extraordinary ability in the sciences, arts, education, business, or athletics;
Be able to provide extensive documentation of sustained national and/or international acclaim; and
Seek to enter the United States to continue work in their area of extraordinary ability. However, the position need not require the services of a person of extraordinary ability.


Visas can be applied for an initial period of 3 years and may be extended in one-year increments. There is no limit on the number of extensions allowed.
Dependents of the O-1 beneficiary hold O-3 status.
*Note: unlike the H-1B category, the Department of Labor is not involved in the O-1 process.
O-1 Eligibility and Documentation Required
Extraordinary ability is defined as a high level of expertise and indicates that the person is one of a small percentage who has risen to the very top of his/her field. Find eligibility and required documentation.Applying for an O-1 VisaFrom Outside the United StatesIf you are currently living outside of the United States, an O-1 overseas petition will be prepared. Find overseas application procedures and checklistsFrom Within the U.S.If you are currently living in the United States in a different visa category (such as F-1, J-1, H-1B, etc.), then a Change of Status O-1 petition will be prepared. Find change of status application procedures and checklists.Extending or Amending an O-1If you currently hold an O-1 visa, but something is changing such as your host institution, end date, job details or similar, an O-1 extension will be prepared.
Find extension/amendment procedures and checklistsO-1 Visa Compliance and Travel
It is important that you maintain your O-1 status by extending/amending your visa if necessary, and by following the visa's compliance requirements.
View all visa requirements and restrictions
Bringing Spouses/Partners and Children
Spouses and children under age 21 will fall in the O-3 visa category. This category carries certain restrictions, such as ineligibility to seek employment.
Learn about O-3 visas and find application instructions
HomeInternational ScholarsExtraordinary Individuals (O-1)O-1 Eligibility
O-1 EligibilitySee below for an explanation on the eligibility for establishing that the beneficiary possesses extraordinary ability. USCIS considers the quality of the evidence provided and not just whether the minimum amount of documentation has been submitted.Eligibility within the Sciences, Education, Business, AthleticsEligibility within the ArtsEligibility within the Sciences, Education, Business, AthleticsOpenCloseThere are 2 main bases in which extraordinary ability in the sciences, education, business and athletics may be demonstrated.
Basis A: Receipt of a Nobel Prize Caliber Award
An individual may qualify for the O-1 category based on the receipt of the Nobel Prize or other award of similar international standing. It is not sufficient to have been nominated; he or she must have received the award. 
Basis B: Documentation Showing Extraordinary Ability
Basis B: Documentation Showing Extraordinary Ability
The individual must demonstrate at least three of the following:
Documentation of the alien's receipt of nationally or internationally recognized prizes or awards for excellence in the field of endeavor;
Documentation of the alien's membership in associations in the field for which classification is sought, which require outstanding achievements of their members, as judged by recognized national or international experts in their disciplines or fields;
Published material in professional or major trade publications or major media about the alien, relating to the alien's work in the field for which classification is sought, which shall include the title, date, and author of such published material, and any necessary translation;
Evidence of the alien's participation on a panel, or individually, as a judge of the work of others in the same or in an allied field of specialization to that for which classification is sought;
Evidence of the alien's original scientific, scholarly, or business-related contributions of major significance in the field;
Evidence of the alien's authorship of scholarly articles in the field, in professional journals, or other major media;
Evidence that the alien has been employed in a critical or essential capacity for organizations and establishments that have a distinguished reputation;
Evidence that the alien has either commanded a high salary or will command a high salary or other remuneration for services, evidenced by contracts or other reliable evidence.
Eligibility within the ArtsOpenCloseThere are 2 main bases in which an extraordinary ability in the creative arts (fine arts, visual arts, performing arts, visiting curator) may be demonstrated.
Basis A: Receipt of a National or International Award or Prize
An individual may qualify for the O-1 category based on the receipt of an award such as an Academy Award, an Emmy, a Grammy or a Director’s Guild Award.  It is not sufficient to have been nominated; he or she must have received the award. 
Basis B: Documentation Showing Extraordinary Ability
Basis B: Documentation Showing Extraordinary Ability
The individual must demonstrate at least three of the following:
Evidence that the alien has performed, and will perform, services as a lead or starring participant in productions or events which have a distinguished reputation as evidenced by critical reviews, advertisements, publicity releases, publications contracts, or endorsements;
Evidence that the alien has achieved national or international recognition for achievements evidenced by critical reviews or other published materials by or about the individual in major newspapers, trade journals, magazines, or other publications;
Evidence that the alien has performed, and will perform, in a lead, starring, or critical role for organizations and establishments that have a distinguished reputation evidenced by articles in newspapers, trade journals, publications, or testimonials;
Evidence that the alien has a record of major commercial or critically acclaimed successes as evidenced by such indicators as title, rating, standing in the field, box office receipts, motion picture or television ratings, and other occupational achievements reported in trade journals, major newspapers, or other publications;
Evidence that the alien has received significant recognition for achievements from organizations, critics, government agencies, or other recognized experts in the field in which the alien is engaged. Such testimonials must be in a form which clearly indicates the author's authority, expertise, and knowledge of the alien's achievements; or
Evidence that the alien has either commanded a high salary or will command a high salary or other substantial remuneration for services in relation to others in the field, as evidenced by contracts or other reliable evidence
Documentation
Documentation
Documentation of the above eligibility is required and may be in the form of affidavits, contracts, awards, or other types of documentation.  
A written Advisory Opinion must accompany an O-1 petition from a peer review group such as an appropriate consulting entity or labor organization.
The documentation should also be supported by letters from experts who can establish the outstanding nature of the beneficiary’s contributions to the field of endeavor.
The Beneficiary should be prepared to gather this evidence in collaboration with the selected attorney.
HomeInternational ScholarsExtraordinary Individuals (O-1)Apply for an Initial O-1
Apply for an Initial O-1The OISS only accepts O-1 requests from Northwestern sponsoring departments. The host department will collect information from the prospective O-1 and provide all of the documents to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) in one file. The OISS advisor will then review the documents and will work with an immigration attorney, the department, and the prospective O-1 beneficiary to file the petition to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
View instructions for host departments.
Instructions for Incoming O-1 Beneficiaries
1. Submit required documentation to your host department.
Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the OISS:

Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)

Questions? Contact the Office of International Student and Scholar Services or departmental contact. 
2. The OISS reviews materials for the O-1 visa application.

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails you and the department if any additional documents are necessary.

3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition.

Upon OISS approval, you will select from a list of immigration attorneys to work with for the remainder of your case.
The immigration attorney will work with you, the department, and the OISS to gather the evidence of your extraordinary achievements and to file the petition.

4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS.
4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS.

Within approximately two to three weeks, the attorney will notify you, the OISS, and your department confirming a receipt notice of the filing.
Expect a decision within three to four months of the filing, unless the petition was filed using premium processing. The attorney will notify you, your department, and the OISS of the decision, and if it is approved, will forward the notice to you for use at the visa interview.

5. Apply for the O-1 visa at a US Consulate or Embassy.
To apply for your O-1 visa, you will need to make an appointment with the U.S. Consulate/Embassy closest to your place of residence. Please be aware that it may take a few weeks to get an appointment. Allow additional time: two to three months if a background check is deemed necessary by the consular official.
Bring the following documents to your appointment:
Completed Visa Application Form, DS-160 (if applicable)
Original I-797 Approval Notice form
Copies of the O-1 (I-129) petition
Updated letter of employment from your NU department (necessary for renewing O-1 visas)
Application fee. Please check the US Consulate/Embassy website for details
If dependents are accompanying you, please make sure that you have birth certificates of your children; have an original marriage certificate, photographs of your wedding, invitations, etc. as proof of evidence.
Please check the US Consulate/Embassy website for any additional documents required by an individual consular post.
Note: If while applying for an O-1 visa stamp, your name is sent for a background check, there is very little the university can do to ameliorate the situation. However, if more than 60-days have passed since the date of application, and no information has been given regarding application status, please follow the instructions on the OISS website regarding Visa Stamp Delay.
6. Arrival and check-in.
You must check in with the OISS and then the Payroll Office upon arrival and prior to starting work. Please note that if you are arriving from outside the U.S., you may only enter 10 days or less before your O-1 start date.
HomeInternational ScholarsExtraordinary Individuals (O-1)Extend or Amend an O-1
Extend or Amend an O-1Current O-1 visa holders need to apply for O-1 extensions in advance of their expiration. The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) only accepts O-1 requests from Northwestern sponsoring departments. The host department will collect information from the prospective O-1 and provide all of the documents to OISS in one file. The OISS advisor will then review the documents and will work with an immigration attorney, the department, and the prospective O-1 beneficiary to file the petition to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
The type of extension filed may vary slightly but the basic procedures are the same:
O-1 COE (Change of Employer) holds an O-1 at another institution but will be hired by Northwestern.
O-1 EOS (Extension) hold an O-1 at Northwestern but will extend employment end-date
O-1 Amend holds an O-1 at Northwestern but need to change details such as site of activity, job title, job description, salary, or hours worked.

View instructions for host departments.
Instructions for Incoming O-1 Beneficiaries
1. Submit required documentation to your host department.
Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the IO:
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of O-1 visa stamp
Copy of I-94 record
Copies of all previous O-1 Approval Notices
Three most recent pay stubs from Northwestern (wait for your IO advisor or the attorney to request these via email)
If you once held a J-1 visa, copies of proof of J-1 status such as J1 visa stamp(s), DS-2019(s)
If you were subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement, copy of waiver recommendation and copy of I-612

Addressing Dependents
The O-1 beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539, including the following documents, should be included in this O-1 extension filing. Please review our guidelines and tips for filing the I-539.
Completed form I-539
Copy of dependent(s) visa stamp page
Copy of dependent(s) passport biographical page
Copy of dependent(s) previous H-4 approval notice(s)
Printout of dependent(s) I-94
$370 check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (payable by your or your department)
Copy of marriage certificate for spouse and/or birth certificate(s) for children. Include both original and English translation.

Questions? Contact the International Office or departmental contact. 
2. The OISS reviews materials for the O-1’s visa application.

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails you and the department if any additional documents are necessary.

3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition.

Upon OISS approval, you will select from a list of immigration attorneys to work with for the remainder of the case.
The immigration attorney will work with you, the department, and the OISS work together to gather the evidence of extraordinary achievements and to file the petition.
4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS.
All O-1 beneficiaries must receive the Receipt Notice from USCIS before employment in O-1 status at Northwestern can continue. If the intended employment start-date approaches and you do not have a Receipt Notice, the NU hiring department will have to delay employment.
While the Receipt Notice is required for work to continue/begin at Northwestern for Extension/Amend cases, the Approval Notice is required for all international travel. Please communicate with your IO advisor about any upcoming international travel plans.

Within approximately two to three weeks, the attorney will notify beneficiary, the OISS and the department confirming a receipt notice of the filing.
Expect a decision within three to four months of the filing, unless the petition was filed using premium processing. The attorney will notify the beneficiary, department and the OISS of the decision, and if it is approved, will forward the notice.
HomeInternational ScholarsExtraordinary Individuals (O-1)Apply for a Change of Status for O-1
Apply for a Change of Status for O-1The OISS only accepts O-1 requests from Northwestern sponsoring departments. The host department will collect information from the prospective O-1 and provide all of the documents to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) in one file.  The OISS advisor will then review the documents and will work with an immigration attorney, the department, and the prospective O-1 beneficiary to file the petition to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
View instructions for host departments.
Instructions for Incoming O-1 Beneficiaries
1. Submit required documentation to your host department.
Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the OISS:

Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)

If you once held a J-1 visa:
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)

If you once held a J-1 visa:

Copies of proof of J-1 status such as J1 visa stamp(s), DS-2019(s)

If you are subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement:

Copy of waiver recommendation
Copy of I-612
Proof that you fulfilled the requirements by living and working in your home country for a full two years

NOTE: Individuals subject to 212(e) 2-year residence requirement are eligible for O-1 classification although s/he is not eligible to change from J to O status within the U.S. and must apply for an O visa abroad and re-enter in O-1 status.
If you have dependents in the U.S., they should:

Submit the I-539 form and associated documents. Please review our guidelines and tips for filing the I-539.

Questions? Contact the Office of International Student and Scholar Services or departmental contact. 
2. The OISS reviews materials for the O-1’s visa application.
OISS reviews the paperwork and emails you and the department if any additional documents are necessary.

3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition.

Upon OISS approval, you will select from a list of immigration attorneys to work with for the remainder of your case.
The immigration attorney will work with you, the department, and the OISS to gather the evidence of extraordinary achievements and to file the petition.

4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS.
You must receive the Approval Notice from USCIS before employment in O-1 status at Northwestern can begin.

Within approximately two to three weeks, the attorney will notify beneficiary, the OISS and the department confirming a receipt notice of the filing.
Expect a decision within three to four months of the filing, unless the petition was filed using premium processing. The attorney will notify the beneficiary, department and the OISS of the decision, and if it is approved, will forward the notice.
5. Arrival and check-in.
You must retrieve your Approval Notice documents from the OISS and present the original to the Payroll Office prior to starting employment in O-1 status.

HomeInternational ScholarsExtraordinary Individuals (O-1)Visas for Spouses and Children
Visas for Spouses and ChildrenDependents (husband/wife, and/or unmarried children under the age of 21) of O-1 beneficiaries fall into the O-3 visa category.
Visa Requirements

Study: O-3 dependents may attend academic institutions as long as the educational program does not include paid employment (e.g., co-op or research assistantship).
Employment: O-3 dependents are not eligible for employment.

Required Documentation
Required Documentation

Applying for an Overseas O-3: Dependents do not need to file additional documentation. Dependents use O-1 supporting documentation to apply for the O-3 visa and do not receive their own Approval Notices).
Extending or changing status: It is the responsibility of the O-1 beneficiary and the O-3 dependent to maintain the O-3 status. The dependent must file Form I-539 to change his/her status in any way, including changing to a different visa category, extending the O-3 end-date, or documenting the beneficiary's change of employer.
Travel: When traveling, O-3 dependents should carry with him/her a copy of the O-1 Approval Notice, copy of the O-1 petition most recently submitted to USCIS, as well as any other relevant documents related to O-3 status (Approval Notice, O-3 visa stamp) and a valid passport.

Please review our guidelines and tips for filing the I-539. You may submit this form to the IO for review or you may choose to file it yourself.
HomeInternational ScholarsExtraordinary Individuals (O-1)O-1 Compliance and Travel
O-1 Compliance and TravelTravel Restrictions and RequirementsSee the Employee Travel page to view requirements for O-1 visa-holders. Maintaining O-1 Visa Status
Address Updates
If you change your residential address, please update this information with USCIS using form AR-11. Information can be found on the USCIS website.
For Incoming O-1 Applicants Outside the U.S.
Northwestern can file the petition to sponsor an O-1 employee up to 1 year before employment begins but the beneficiary may only enter the U.S. up to 10 days before the start date on his/her O-1 Approval Notice.
O-1 visa holders coming to NU from outside the U.S. need to check-in with the IO before starting employment at NU. To do so, please complete the H-1B/E-3/O-1 Beneficiary Check-In Form and bring your immigration documents including your passport for the IO to photocopy and keep on file.
For O-1 Visa-Holders Seeking Extension
For O-1 Visa-Holders Seeking Extension
It is important to maintain your O-1 status by applying for an O-1 extension in a timely manner. Please communicate with your current supervisor/department about your O-1 extension.
If you have dependents in the U.S. please remember to file Form I-539 form to extend their O-3 status.
Concurrent Employment
Multiple, or concurrent, O-1 employers are permitted, as long as each has an O-1 petition approved by USCIS.
Off-Campus Occasional Lectures
O-1 beneficiaries are eligible to be issued reimbursement for transportation and reasonable incidental expenses incurred while traveling to off-campus lectures but s/he is not approved to be paid a wage, salary or honorarium for these services. Please contact an OISS advisor for more information and for an approval letter.
HomeInternational ScholarsLegal Permanent Residence
Legal Permanent ResidenceNorthwestern University sponsors foreign nationals on nonimmigrant visas for Legal Permanent Resident (LPR) status.
Also known as green card, Legal Permanent Resident (LPR) permits foreign nationals and their dependents to permanently remain and be employed in the United States. Departments assume the role of a sponsor and all the responsibilities associated with the process.Learn moreLearn more about Legal Permanent Residence including LPR categories and the internal Northwestern LPR process.
HomeHost DepartmentsLPR Sponsorship
Legal Permanent Residence (LPR)Questions?Please email all LPR inquiries to LPR@northwestern.edu.Permanent Residents (often called green card holders) are authorized to live and work on a permanent basis in the U.S. While most nonimmigrants must document their intent to depart the U.S. after a period of status, green card holders are permitted to remain in the U.S.
There are several ways to obtain permanent residency in the U.S., including:

An employer-sponsored green card application, based on a specific, permanent, full-time job offer.

The employment-based green card application system allows for five preference categories, commonly abbreviated as EB-1, EB-2, etc. Each preference category may have several sub-categories.


A self-sponsored employment-based green card application without the need for a specific job offer.
Self-sponsored green card applications can generally be filed under EB-1 Extraordinary Ability (EB-1A) and EB-2 National Interest Waiver (NIW)


Marriage to a U.S. citizen
Sponsorship by a close relative who is a U.S. citizen or legal permanent resident
The U.S. Department of State diversity lottery program
While each way leads to the same goal of green card issuance, the application process, required supporting documentation, and costs vary. The timeline for completing a green card application depends on the type of application as well as the country of birth of the applicant. Every month the State Department puts out the Visa Bulletin, which serves as a person’s place in line for visa availability. It includes charts for final action dates and filing dates, which indicate when individuals may start the application process, but not necessarily proceed to the final stages.
In submitting a request for permanent residency, the OISS will work with the applicant, the department, and outside counsel to maintain the current immigration status throughout the duration of the process, thereby ensuring continued and uninterrupted employment authorization, case management, and ongoing advising.
HomeHost Departments
Hosting International ScholarsAssistance for Host DepartmentsOISS supports Northwestern's departments as they sponsor international visitors and employees with the visa process.Where to start?Please consult the international scholar visa options guide for guidance in determining the appropriate visa category for the scholar you wish to host in your department. That page will connect you with the appropriate steps and forms related to the desired visa category.Visa Options Guide
Questions can be directed to Cara Lawson, Assistant Director of Scholar Services.Compare Visa Types, Fees and Processing timesFor International Scholars
HomeHost DepartmentsVisa Options Guide
Visa Options GuideNarrow Visa Options by CategoryShow AllVisitor VisasEmployee VisasTNVisa for Canadian and Mexican citizens to temporarily engaged in professional business activities.Type: employeeDuration: Indefinite, with extensions in 3-year incrementsView DetailsO-1O-1 status is suitable for individuals who have attained national or international acclaim for extraordinary achievements in the sciences, arts, education, business or athletics.Type: employeeDuration: Indefinite (after 3 initial years), with extensions in one-year incrementsView DetailsLPRLegal Permanent Resident (LPR) permits foreign nationals and their dependents to permanently remain and be employed in the United States. Departments assume the role of a sponsor and all the responsibilities associated with the process.Type: employeeDuration: IndefiniteView DetailsJ-1 Student InternJ-1 visa to participate in a structured internship program (while pursuing a degree in home country)Type: visitorDuration: 1 day to 12
internship program (while pursuing a degree in home country)Type: visitorDuration: 1 day to 12 monthsView DetailsJ-1 Short-TermJ-1 visa for short-term consultation, lecturing, training or demonstration, not including research.Type: visitorDuration: 1 day to 6 monthsView DetailsJ-1 ResearchJ-1 visa for research (primary focus), observation, consultation or teaching.Type: visitorDuration: 3 weeks to 5 yearsView DetailsJ-1 ProfessorJ-1 visa for teaching (primary focus), lecturing, observation, consultation or research. Type: visitorDuration: 3 weeks to 5 yearsView DetailsH-1BH-1B status is suitable for most international researchers, faculty and staff whose position requires the minimum of a bachelor’s degree and who will perform work in a specialized skill area. Type: employeeDuration: Up to 6 yearsView DetailsE-3The E-3 specialty occupation visa category is for Australian nationals (AN).Type: employeeDuration: Indefinite, with extensions in 2-year incrementsView DetailsB1/WBB-1 or WB
employeeDuration: Indefinite, with extensions in 2-year incrementsView DetailsB1/WBB-1 or WB status is for temporary visits to the U.S. for  consultation, observation, or to give a single lecture. It is not for ongoing lecturing or ongoing teaching, research or studying.Type: visitorDuration: 90 days or lessView Details
HomeHost DepartmentsCompare Visa Types, Fees, & Processing Times
Compare Visa Types, Fees and Processing TimesUse the table below to find processing times and fees for the various visitor and employee visa types. Please note the OISS processing times are the minimum; requests can be submitted up to 6 months in advance of the start date. 




Visa Type


OISS Processing Time


External Processing Time


OISS Fees


USCIS  Fees


Attorney Fees




J-1


10 business days


Varies based on consulate


$325
$200 rush fee; automatically applied if request is submitted within 10 business days of program start date


n/a


 n/a




New H-1B 


3 months in advance of start date


2 - 3 weeks with USCIS premium processing
 
Overseas requests will vary by Consulate
 


$1,400


$460 I-129 fee*
$500 fraud fee*
$2,805  premium processing fee*


If the H-1B petition receives request for evidence (RFE), then attorney fees can range $1,000 - 3,500 depending on complexity.




H-1B Change of Employer
H-1B Change of Employer


3 months in advance of start date


2-3 weeks with USCIS for Receipt Notice


$1,400


$460 I-129 fee*
$500 fraud fee*
Optional: $2,805  premium processing fee*


 n/a




H-1B Amendment


3 months in advance of start date


2-3 weeks with USCIS for Receipt Notice


$1,400


$460 I-129 processing*
Optional: $2,805  premium processing fee*


 n/a




H-1B Extension


3 months in advance of start date


2-3 weeks with USCIS for Receipt Notice


$1,400


$460 I-129 processing*Optional:  $2,805  premium processing fee*


 n/a




E-3 Overseas


3 months


Varies based on consulate


$1,400


n/a


 n/a




E-3 within the U.S.


3 months


Varies but usually 4-12 months with USCIS for Approval Notice


$1,400


$460 I-129 processing and $500 fraud fee*


 n/a




TN


2 months


Varies for Mexicans based on consulate; n/a for Canadians


n/a


n/a


 n/a




TN (if requesting a change of status or an extension from within the U.S.)


2 months
n/a




TN (if requesting a change of status or an extension from within the U.S.)


2 months


Varies but usually 4-12 months with USCIS for Approval Notice


n/a


$460 I-129 processing*


 n/a




B1


1 month


Varies based on consulate


n/a


n/a


 n/a




LPR


Varies


Varies


$2,500


 


 Varies




Checks for external (USCIS) fees:
* Checks for external (USCIS) fees need to be requested through Accounts Payable. Please see the H-1B Check Request process and complete the H1-B Check Request Form.

HomeHost DepartmentsB1/WB Short Term Visitors
B1/WB Short Term (Visitor) VisasThe process of requesting B-1 or WB status begins with the host department. After the department's request has been approved, the visitor will need to complete a series of steps.
 View the STEPS FOR INCOMING B1/WB VISITORS.
Steps for Host Department
1. Collect required documents.
Complete the Department B1/WB Request
Write a Letter of Invitation using the template
Obtain an approved Visiting Scholar Health Insurance Application (VSHI) OR obtain a waiver of the Visiting Scholar Health Insurance, both through the Office of Risk Management.
Obtain a copy of the visitor’s passport bio page

2. Scan and email the documents to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS). 
Complete requests should be emailed as one PDF to EVrequest@northwestern.edu

Email subject: "B Request: LAST NAME, Start Date" (e.g. B Request: WILDCAT, 04/01/2013)
File name: "BReq_LAST NAME, First Name" (e.g. BReq_WILDCAT, Willie)

3. An OISS Advisor reviews the request and notifies the department.

If the request has been approved, or
If the request has been denied. The advisor will provide other visa options.

4. If approved, the department sends letter of invitation to the visitor.

View the Steps for Incoming B1/WB Visitors.
View the Steps for Incoming B1/WB Visitors.

HomeHost DepartmentsJ-1 Visas
J-1 VisasJ-1 status is used for those coming to NU as visiting researchers, professors, and collaborators. They are called J-1 Exchange Visitors. The length of a J-1 Exchange Visitor's stay ranges depending on his or her J-1 type; however, the maximum stay is five years. View the types of J-1 Visitor VisasImportant NoteStaff positions hired through human resources can hold J-1 visa status only if they meet the following criteria:

Must be a termed appointment with a clear start and end date.
The primary function of the position must be research-based.
Each position will be reviewed by a scholar advisor to be sure that it fits the J-1 exchange visitor program category. A job description and job matrix must be included when submitting documentation to OISS.
Positions that are not eligible for J-1 visa status may be eligible for H-1B employment visa status. See our H-1B Documentation Requirements webpage to learn more.Steps for Host DepartmentExchange VisitorsThe process of requesting J-1 Exchange Visitor visa status begins with the host department.Host Department InstructionsStudent VisitorsThe process of requesting J-1 Student Intern visa status begins with the host department.Host Department InstructionsVisa Adjustments
There are a number of reasons why a J-1 Exchange Visitors (EV) may need to adjust their J-1 status and/or their DS-2019. For more information visit the J-1 Visa Adjustments page.
Visa Compliance
Visa Compliance
J-1 Exchange Visitors (EV) must abide by certain visa requirements and rules, which are listed on the Visa Compliance page. Also, there are additional rules for those in the Student Intern, and Research Scholar or Professor categories.
HomeHost DepartmentsJ-1 VisasExchange Visitors
Exchange VisitorsThe process of requesting J-1 Exchange Visitor visa status begins with the host department. Once the NU department has submitted a complete J-1 request to the OISS, the OISS advisor will issue the Exchange Visitor (EV) a DS-2019, which is used to obtain his/her J-1 visa stamp at the U.S. embassy/consulate outside the U.S. 
 VIEW THE STEPS FOR INCOMING j-1 Exchange VISITORS
Steps for the Host Department
1. Collect required documents
Send the Exchange Visitor DS-2019 Request to prospective Exchange Visitor (EV) for completion (electronic copies are acceptable). It must be returned to the host department along with associated documents .
Complete the DS-2019 Department Request Form and obtain required signatures.  NOTE: NIH Grant Chart Strings cannot be used to process extension J-1 Requests.
To ensure the requested DS-2019 is issued in a timely manner, please confirm the accuracy of your chartstring and ensure that funds are available before submitting the request to OISS. We will not be able to issue any documents until the chartstring has been charged and cleared through our accounting system.
Confirm English Language Proficiency and complete the English Proficiency AttestationConfirmation of English Language Proficiency  includes collecting the supporting documents; this step is not required for extensions.
Obtain an approved Visiting Scholar Health Insurance Application (VSHI) OR obtain a waiver of the Visiting Scholar Health Insurance, both through the Office of Risk Management.
Obtain official university position confirmation such as Research Staff Appointment form (research positions), Postdoctoral Research Appointment form (postdoctoral positions) or NU Offer Letter.
Obtain funding documentation (if not already included on official university position confirmation above). When submitting bank statements, institutional letters of support or bank letters please use the following guidelines:
Documents must have been issued within the last 3 months.
The EV must be named as account holder or recipient of the letter of support.
The account balance with currency or statement must specify that they have at least $2470 (not including dependents) of support per month. Scholar must show an additional $610 per month for each dependent (spouse or child) they will bring with them on a J-2 visa.
The letter must be in English or notarized English translation.
If the funding information is an institutional letter of support, the dates of coverage and total amount of support must be present,


If transferring from another U.S. institution to NU, please include the J-1 Transfer In Form.  If the EV is eligible for a J-1 transfer, the start date at NU must be the date after the current/previous DS-2019 ends, or earlier. There cannot be a gap in DS-2019 coverage.
2. Scan and email the documents to OISS 
Placing pages 1-4 at the beginning, complete requests should be emailed as one PDF to EVrequest@northwestern.edu

Email subject: "LAST NAME, Start Date" (e.g. WILDCAT, 04/01/2013)
File name: "DS2019Req_LAST NAME, First Name" (e.g. DS2019Req_WILDCAT, Willie)

The request will be forwarded to the appropriate advisor, who will be in contact with the Department and/or the EV with any questions or missing paperwork.
3. OISS issues the DS-2019

The Office of International Student and Scholar Services will issue form DS-2019, and send as a signed digital copy to both scholar and the department contact listed on the Department Request Form, via email.
Please notify scholar advisor immediately, if there are any inaccuracies, so we can amend as needed and re-issue the DS-2019.
The scholar should follow instructions on the outtake email with further steps to book their visa appointment at the nearest US Consulate abroad.
HomeHost DepartmentsJ-1 VisasStudent Visitors
Student VisitorsThe process of requesting J-1 Student Intern visa status begins with the host department. Once the NU department has submitted a complete request to the OISS, the OISS advisor will review the documents and will issue the Exchange Visitor (EV) a DS-2019 and DS-7002, which is used to obtain his/her J-1 visa stamp at the U.S. embassy/consulate outside the U.S.
 View the Steps for Incoming j-1 Student Interns.
Steps for Host Department
1. Collect required documents.
Collect the completed Exchange Visitor DS-2019 Request  and the J-1 Student Intern Student Supplement from the prospective Exchange Visitor (EV) along with associated documents.
Obtain an approved Visiting Scholar Health Insurance Application (VSHI) OR obtain a waiver of the Visiting Scholar Health Insurance, both through the Office of Risk Management.
Confirm English Language Proficiency and complete the English Proficiency Attestation, this includes collecting the supporting documents. This is not required for extensions.
Obtain funding documentation. When submitting bank statements, institutional letters of support or bank letters please use the following guidelines:
Documents must have been issued within the last 3 months.
The EV must be named as account holder or recipient of the letter of support.
The letter must be in English or notarized English translation.
If the funding information is an institutional letter of support, the dates of coverage and total amount of support must be present.


Complete the DS-2019 Request and the J-1 Student Intern Department Supplement and obtain required signatures. Collect all documents on the checklist.

2. Scan and email the documents to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services. 
Complete requests should be emailed as one PDF to EVrequest@northwestern.edu

Email subject: "LAST NAME, Start Date" (e.g. WILDCAT, 04/01/2013)
File name: "DS2019Req_LAST NAME, First Name" (e.g. DS2019Req_WILDCAT, Willie)
The request will be forwarded to the appropriate advisor, who will be in contact with the Department and/or the EV with any questions or missing paperwork.
3. The OISS Advisor issues the DS-2019 and DS-7002.

The Office of International Student and Scholar Services will issue forms DS-2019 and DS-7002,  and send as a signed digital copy the department contact listed on DS2019 Department Request Form, via email.
Please notify scholar advisor immediately if there are any inaccuracies, so we can amend as needed and re-issue the associated document.
 Department contact will then need to have sponsoring PI/supervisor sign form DS-7002, and send back as a pdf to the scholar advisor.
Scholar advisor will forward signed copies of both DS-2019 and DS-7002 to the J-1 scholar along with email outlining further instructions for making a visa appointment at the nearest US Consulate abroad.
HomeHost DepartmentsH-1B Visas
H1-B VisasH-1B status is suitable for most international researchers, faculty and staff whose position requires the minimum of a bachelor’s degree and who will perform work in a specialized skill area. The host department will collect information from the prospective H-1B and file documents to the International Office who will then file the petition to USCIS.
Visa summary:

Visa-holders are skilled workers with a bachelor's degree or higher who perform work in a specialized skill area.
Visas can be held up to six years total, but can only be applied for three years at a time.
Dependents of the H-1B beneficiary hold H-4 visas.
Types of H-1B Visa Applications
There are several different types of H-1B visa applications depending on the current status of the prospective employee.  See the Documentation Requirements for H-1B  Visas to view the differences at a glance.
In general, the type of H-1B visa will depend on whether you are a new or current H-B visa-holder.Steps for Host DepartmentAPPLYING FOR AN INITIAL H-1B VISANew applicants fall into one of the two following H-1B types:
H-1B Overseas are new applicants living outside the United States
H-1B COS (Change of Status) currently live in the United States in a different visa category
Steps to Apply for an initial H-1BEXTENDING OR AMENDING AN H-1B
H-1B COE (Change of Employer) holds an H-1B at another institution but are starting employment at Northwestern
H-1B EOS (Extension of Status) hold an H-1B at Northwestern and would like to extend end date
H-1B Amend hold an H-1B at Northwestern but job title, description, site of activity, salary, and/or hours have changed.
H-1B Concurrent hold an H-1B at another institution but will concurrently work at Northwestern.
Steps to Extend or Amend a H-1B
Visa Compliance and Regulation
It is important that the visa holder maintain their H-1B status by extending/amending the visa if necessary, and by following the visa's compliance requirements. View all visa requirements and restrictions.
Beneficiaries currently in the U.S. should consult with the OISS advisor regarding all plans to travel outside the US before the anticipated approval of the petition. Leaving the U.S. while a change of status, extension, amendment, or change of employer petition is pending approval by USCIS may be considered abandonment of the petition or  result in additional visa processing delays and employment disruption. OISS can coordinate the submission of a petition to accommodate travel plans with advanced notice.
Bringing Dependents (Spouses and Children)
Spouses and children under age 21 will fall in the H-4 visa category. This category carries certain restrictions, such as ineligibility to seek employment. Learn about H-4 visas and find application instructions.
HomeHost DepartmentsH-1B VisasInitial H-1B
Initial H-1BRelated LinksH-1B Department Request Form
H-1B Itinerary Letter Example
H-1B Check Request Process
LCA Posting Notice
USCIS Premium ProcessingOverseas and Change of Status applicants will need to apply for an initial H-1B. The OISS only accepts H-1B requests from NU sponsoring departments, so any application should begin with the applicant speaking with his or her department, who will initiate the process with the OISS.
Instructions for incoming H-1B beneficiaries
Steps for Host Department
1. Collect required documents 
In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant (listed above), the host department is responsible for the following items:

H-1B Department Request Form
Offer letter, including the H-1B's start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
H-1B Itinerary Letter (See example)
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested H-1B
For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For staff positions: HR offer confirmation letter and HR job description;
For research staff: research staff appointment;
For postdoctoral fellowships: postdoctoral research appointment.



2. Scan and email the documents to OISS
Placing the H-1B Department Authorization Form at the beginning, complete requests should be emailed as one PDF to EVrequest@northwestern.edu

Email subject: "LAST NAME, Start Date" (e.g. WILDCAT, 04/01/2013)
File name: "H-1BReq_LAST NAME, First Name" (e.g. H-1BReq_WILDCAT, Willie)
The request will be forwarded to the appropriate advisor, who will be in contact with the department and/or the EV with any questions or missing paperwork.
3.  Checks sent to 1902 Sheridan Road, via inter campus mail.
 $460 and $500 processing fee checks must be paid by the department. If the department would like to use Premium Processing, the department must also pay a $2,805 USCIS Premium Processing fee.  All checks must be separate and all are paid to the Department of Homeland Security. See H-1B check request process for detailed instructions. We will not be able to submit the petition to USCIS without the checks. Please submit the check request to Accounts Payable at the time of submitting the H-1B request, so the submission process is not delayed.

4. OISS and department manage the Prevailing Wage Determination (PWD) and Labor Condition Application (LCA) requirements
The following steps are required:
The OISS obtains the PWD to ensure that the university's wage offer is adequate.
The OISS files an LCA with the U.S. Department of Labor.
The OISS emails the LCA notice to the host department, which posts it at a conspicuous place for 10 business days. See posting notice instructions. (OISS recommend that you request the processing fee checks from Accounts Payable at this time)
Within 7 days of filing, the LCA is approved; the OISS sends the certified LCA to the Department for signatures and return.

5. OISS prepares the H-1B petition for submission to USCIS

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the Department and Beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.
OISS files the application with USCIS and provides the Department and Beneficiary with a UPS tracking number.

6. Receive Receipt Notice and Approval by USCIS
6. Receive Receipt Notice and Approval by USCIS

OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the receipt of the Receipt Notice.
OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the decision made by USCIS. Once approved, the I-797 Approval Notice along with an entire copy of the petition can be retrieved from the OISS. 
If Beneficiary is outside of Evanston/Chicago area, the OISS will coordinate shipping the Approval Notice and supporting documents to the Beneficiary. The Approval Notice is required for international travel.

Note: Change of Status applicants must retrieve the Approval Notice and supporting documents from the OISS and present the original to University Payroll prior to starting employment in H-1B status.

HomeHost DepartmentsH-1B VisasH-1B Extension or Amendment
H-1B Extension or AmendmentThe procedures for making the following changes are provided on this webpage.
H-1B COE (Change of Employer) hold an H-1B at another institution but will be hired by Northwestern.
H-1B EOS (Extension) hold an H-1B at Northwestern but will extend employment end-date (all other employment information remains the same).
H-1B Amend hold an H-1B at Northwestern but need to change details such as site of activity, job title, job description, salary, or hours worked.

Although the steps and materials required may vary slightly, the basic procedure is the same:
The H-1B applicant will submit required forms and documentation to the host department. The host department will complete its own required forms and submit the entire packet to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services.
The applicant will receive an invitation via email to complete an online questionnaire in Docketwise.
The OISS will handle Prevailing Wage Determination and Labor Condition Application requirements.
The OISS will prepare the petition and submit it to USCIS.
After receiving USCIS Receipt Notice, the H-1B applicant may begin/continue work at Northwestern.
After receiving USCIS Receipt Notice, the H-1B applicant may begin/continue work at Northwestern.

OISS requests that documentation be submitted to our office 3 months in advance of the desired effective date for all requests. Consult your OISS advisor regarding cases that require an expedited timeline. The Receipt Notice is required for work to continue or begin at Northwestern for COE/Extension/Amend cases, but the Approval Notice is required for all new employment and international travel. The applicant must communicate with their OISS advisor regarding any upcoming international travel plans.
View the Instructions for E-3 beneficiaries
Steps for Host DepartmentChange of Employer (COE) to NorthwesternH-1B ExtensionAmended H-1BChange of Employer (COE) to NorthwesternOpenClose1. In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant (listed on the Instructions for H-1B beneficiary page), the host department is responsible for the following items.
H-1B Department Request Form
Offer letter, including the H-1B's start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
H-1B Itinerary Letter (See example)
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested H-1B

For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For staff positions: HR offer confirmation letter and HR job description;
For research staff: research staff appointment;
For postdoctoral fellowships: postdoctoral research appointment.


Separate checks for $460 and $500 processing fees, made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (must be paid by the department) H-1B Check Request
Optional: $2,805 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by hiring department).

2. The OISS and department manage the Prevailing Wage Determination (PWD) and Labor Condition Application (LCA) requirements. 
The following steps are required:
The OISS obtains a PWD to ensure that the university's offered wage is adequate.
The OISS files an LCA with the Department of Labor.
The OISS emails the LCA notice to the host department, which posts it at a conspicuous place for 10 business days. See posting notice instructions.
Within seven days of filing, the LCA is approved; the IO sends the certified LCA to the Department for signatures and return.

3. The OISS prepares H-1B petition for submission to USCIS.

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the Department and/or Beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.
OISS files the application with USCIS and provides the Department and/or Beneficiary with a UPS tracking number.

4. The Receipt and Approval Notices are sent after the following processing times.
4. The Receipt and Approval Notices are sent after the following processing times.

The OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the receipt of the Receipt Notice. The Receipt Notice is required for employment to continue at Northwestern.
The OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the decision made by USCIS. The Approval Notice and supporting documents may then be retrieved form the OISS.
If Beneficiary is outside of Evanston/Chicago area, the OISS will coordinate shipping the Approval Notice and supporting documents to the Beneficiary. The Approval Notice is required for international travel.
Dependents and Form I-539
If this application includes an extension, the H-1B beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539 should be included in this H-1B extension filing. If there is no request to extend the beneficiary's end date, then an I-539 may not be necessary.H-1B ExtensionOpenClose1. In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant (listed on the Instructions for H-1B beneficiary page), the host department is responsible for the following items.

H-1B Department Request Form
Offer letter, including the H-1B's start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
H-1B Itinerary Letter (See example)
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested H-1B

For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For staff positions: HR offer confirmation letter and HR job description;
For research staff: research staff appointment;
For postdoctoral fellowships: postdoctoral research appointment.
Separate checks for $460 and $500 processing fees, made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (must be paid by the department). See H-1B Check Request.
Optional: $2,805 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by hiring department).

2. The OISS and department manage the Prevailing Wage Determination (PWD) and Labor Condition Application (LCA) requirements. 
The following steps are required:

The OISS confirms that the job duties and requirements are consistent with the existing petition. The OISS determines the PW using the job code and level from the previous petition to ensure that the university's offered wage is adequate.
The OISS files an LCA with the Department of Labor.
The OISS emails the LCA notice to the host department, which posts it at a conspicuous place for 10 business days. See posting notice instructions.
Within seven days of filing, the LCA is approved; the OISS sends the certified LCA to the Department for signatures and return.

3. The OISS prepares H-1B petition for submission to USCIS.

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the Department and/or Beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.
OISS files the application with USCIS and provides the Department and/or Beneficiary with a FedEx tracking number.

4. The Receipt and Approval Notices are sent after the following processing times.
4. The Receipt and Approval Notices are sent after the following processing times. 

The OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the receipt of the Receipt Notice. The Receipt Notice is required for employment to continue at Northwestern.
The OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the decision made by USCIS. The Approval Notice and supporting documents may then be retrieved form the OISS.
If Beneficiary is outside of Evanston/Chicago area, the OISS will coordinate shipping the Approval Notice and supporting documents to the Beneficiary. The Approval Notice is required for international travel.


Dependents and Form I-539
The H-1B beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539, including the following documents, should be included in this H-1B extension filing.
Completed form I-539 and I-539A (if there is more than one dependent, each additional dependent needs to complete an I-539A)
Copy of dependent(s) visa stamp page
Copy of dependent(s) passport biographical page
Copy of dependent(s) previous H-4 approval notice(s)
Printout of dependent(s) I-94
$370 fee check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (payable by your or your department)
Copy of marriage certificate for spouse and/or birth certificate(s) for children. Include both original and English translation.
Amended H-1BOpenCloseIf the only change will be an increase/decrease in salary, please contact the assigned OISS Advisor so that we can evaluate if an H-1B Amendment is necessary.
If the position will change (e.g. new job title, new job description, new site of activity, promotion, transfer to another NU department, different hours per week), the beneficiary is required to submit H-1B Amendment paperwork and receive a USCIS Receipt Notice before any change occurs.
1. In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant  (listed on the Instructions for H-1B beneficiary page), the host department is responsible for the following items.
H-1B Department Request Form
Offer letter, including the H-1B's start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
H-1B Itinerary Letter (See example)
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested H-1B

For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For staff positions: HR offer confirmation letter and HR job description;
For research staff: research staff appointment;
For postdoctoral fellowships: postdoctoral research appointment.


$460 Processing fee check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (must be paid by the department). See H-1B Check Request.
Optional: $2,805 for USCIS Premium Processing that guarantees Receipt/Approval notices within 20 days. Check must be made to the Department of Homeland Security (payable by hiring department).

2. The OISS and department manage the Prevailing Wage Determination (PWD) and Labor Condition Application (LCA) requirements. 
The following steps are required:
The OISS obtains a PWD to ensure that the university's offered wage is adequate.
The OISS files an LCA with the Department of Labor.


The OISS emails the LCA notice to the host department, which posts it at a conspicuous place for 10 business days. See posting notice instructions.
Within seven days of filing, the LCA is approved; the OISS sends the certified LCA to the Department for signatures and return.

3. The OISS prepares H-1B petition for submission to USCIS.

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the Department and/or Beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.
OISS files the application with USCIS and provides the Department and/or Beneficiary with a FedEx tracking number.

4. The Receipt and Approval Notices are sent after the following processing times.
4. The Receipt and Approval Notices are sent after the following processing times.

The OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the receipt of the Receipt Notice. The Receipt Notice is required for employment to continue at Northwestern.
The OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the decision made by USCIS. The Approval Notice and supporting documents may then be retrieved form the OISS.
If Beneficiary is outside of Evanston/Chicago area, the OISS will coordinate shipping the Approval Notice and supporting documents to the Beneficiary. The Approval Notice is required for international travel.
Processing Times
H-1B requests may be submitted a maximum of 6 months before the desired effective date. USCIS regular processing times vary throughout the year. Opting for premium processing ensures the petition will be adjudicated by USCIS within 15 days.
HomeHost DepartmentsH-1B VisasH-1B or E-3 Check Request Process
H-1B or E-3 Check Request ProcessQuestions?Please contact Cara Lawson, Assistant Director of Scholar Servicesc-lawson@northwestern.edu
For further guidance, please consult the Training Guide for Submitting a Payment in NU Financials.These instructions are intended for Northwestern department administrators who are supporting an H-1B or E-3 (Australian National) visa petition. Below you will find the steps to request a Northwestern check payment of DHS fees. The OISS requires the checks be requested in the following manner so that the checks can be accurately paired with the H-1B petition to file with U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Services (USCIS).
We recommend the NU department request the check at the time of the H-1B (or E-3) submission to the OISS.
Please refer to OISS Visa Types, Fees and Processing Times for fee table
Create the check payment request in NU Financials in the "Payment Request Center." There are 4 steps to the process in NU Financials: 1) Summary, 2) Supplier, 3) Invoice Details, and 4) Review and Submit.

STEP 1: Summary
1.  INVOICE NUMBER field: Please include the following information, in this order

Beneficiary's last name, first initial
Type of DHS fee (filing, fraud or premium)
Year of check
OISS scholar advisor initials

See examples:



Zhang, Q_filing_2022_JM
for $460 check for filing fee


Zhang, Q_fraud_2022_JM
for $500 check for fraud fee


Zhang, Q_premium_2022_JM
for $2,805 check for premium processing fee
Zhang, Q_premium_2022_JM
for $2,805 check for premium processing fee



2.   DESCRIPTION field, please note:DHS check for _______________ (amount and type of fee) for _________ (scholar full name)
3.  NOTES/COMMENTS field: "Please intercampus mail directly to OISS (scholar Advisor Initials) at 1902 Sheridan Rd., Evanston IL 60208
4.  PAYMENT HANDLING field:  Hold in Evanston (code HE)
5.  ATTACHMENT:  You must include an attachment (see upper left corner). Include the completed H-1B Check Request Form. NOTE: Use the same form for an E-3 check request.
See example:

Step 2: Supplier

Search for Department of Homeland Security in the supplier field
Select the Laguna Niguel, CA location

See example

 
Step 3: Accounting Details

Enter your department and chart string information
The "Account Code" at the far right of this page is Account Code. Enter 76780 which is assigned to "Int'l Office Visa Process fee"
Step 4: Review and Submit
Review your information and click the "submit" button in the top right corner. If you need to make adjustments, use the "previous" button to go back.
See example:

HomeHost DepartmentsTN Visas
TN VisasDependent and Extension Information
View Visa Information for Family/Dependents of TN employees
See the  TN Extension webpage for instructions for extending an existing TN.
Created under NAFTA and continuing under the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), this category facilitates the entry of qualified citizens from Canada and Mexico to temporarily engage in professional business activities.  Eligible employees can be admitted to the U.S. in TN status in increments of up to 3 years at a time.
They can come for the following purposes:

Working for a U.S. employer as a professional.
Working for a foreign employer (including even a non-Canadian or non-Mexican employer) to provide pre-arranged professional services to a U.S. employer.
Occupations listed in USMCA Chapter 16 Appendix 2 qualify for employment under USMCA and must meet the minimum qualification for each profession, as listed.
Eligibility

Must be a citizen of Canada or Mexico.
Must possess the qualification and necessary license as per the designated occupation.
Degree must have been earned from institutions located in Canada, Mexico or the U.S.; if not, a credential evaluation must be done for equivalency.
Employment must be temporary and cannot be used to bring tenure-line faculty.
Position must be NU benefits-eligible and paid.
Steps for Host Department
As part of the request to the OISS, the host department will draft an offer of employment to the prospective TN employee. Once approved by OISS, the TN employee will then present required documents to an immigration or consular official. View the Steps for incoming TN employees.
TN requests must be submitted to the OISS at minimum two weeks prior to the begin date for Canadian citizens and two months for citizens of Mexico.
See our TN Extension webpage for instructions for extending an existing TN.
1. Department collects all required documents.
Required Documents

TN Request Form
Biographical page of passport
NU appointment/position confirmation
Copies of diploma/transcripts demonstrating the professional level required for position
Updated CV
Credential Evaluation IF degree earned from institutions outside of US, Canada or Mexico
Invitation letter from the department containing the following information:
Evidence that the employment is listed as a designated occupation
Evidence of required educational qualifications and/or additional licenses or credentials
Description of duties
Reference to the temporary nature of the position
Dates of employment and salary
Sample Invitation Letter



2.  Department submits all required documents to OISS.
Complete requests should be emailed as one PDF to EVrequest@northwestern.edu

E-mail subject: "TN Request: LAST NAME, Start Date" (e.g. TN Request: WILDCAT, 04/01/2016)
File name: "TNReq_LAST NAME, First Name" (e.g. TNReq_WILDCAT, Willie)

3.  OISS approves TN request (or requests additional information).
4.  Department mails Invitation Letter to TN employee.

HomeHost DepartmentsE3 Visas
E-3 (Australian National) VisasThe E-3 specialty occupation visa category is for Australian nationals (AN).
Visa summary:
Visa-holders are skilled workers with a bachelor's degree or higher, entering the U.S. to perform services in a “specialty occupation."
The initial visa and extensions have 2-year increments, and stay can be granted indefinitely.
The OISS only accepts E-3 requests from NU sponsoring departments, which must confirm sponsorship of an E-3 before an AN can apply.
Dependents of the E-3 beneficiary hold E-3 dependent visa status, and may apply for work authorization upon arrival in the US. 
E-3 visas are not dual-intent, unlike the H-1B visa.
Steps for the Host DepartmentApplying for an initial E-3 visa Initial E-3 applications are for Australian nationals (AN) outside the U.S. Supporting documentation must be collected by the host department, and submitted to the OISS for review, intake and processing.
View steps for the scholar on the Instructions for Incoming E-3 beneficiaries page. Instructions for host departmentsExtension/Amendment, Change of Employer or Change of Status to E-3
E-3 COE (Change of Employer) are transferring to Northwestern from another institution.
E-3 EOS (Extension/ Amendment) would like to extend/amend employment.
E-3 COS (Change of Status) currently holds status in another immigration category such as J-1 or F-1.
View steps for the scholar on the Instructions for  E-3 beneficiaries page. Instructions for host departments
E-3 Dependents (Spouses and Children)
Dependents of the E-3 beneficiary hold E-3 dependent visa status. Visit then E3 Visas for Spouses and Children page for more information.
HomeHost DepartmentsE3 VisasInitial E-3
Initial E-3The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) only accepts E-3 requests from NU sponsoring departments, so any E-3 application should begin with the E-3 applicant speaking with his or her sponsoring department; once the department has confirmed its sponsorship, the Australian National (AN) can apply.
View instructions for incoming E-3 beneficiaries
Petitions can only be started within six months of employment start date. OISS processing times are subject to change based on processing volume.
Steps for Host Department
1. Submit E-3 visa request documents to OISS
The host department is responsible for collecting and submitting the following items to OISS.  Please save all documents in one PDF and send to evrequests@northwestern.edu.

E-3 Department Request Form
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested E-3, salary and job title.
For faculty: faculty appointment letter
For staff positions: Human Resources offer confirmation letter
For research staff: research staff appointment
For postdoctoral fellowships: postdoctoral research appointment


E-3 Itinerary Letter (See example)
CV
Diploma
Transcripts
Credential Evaluation if degree is from overseas
Passport Bio page
Any previous immigration documents, such as DS-2019 or I-20

2. OISS and department manage the prevailing wage determination (PWD) and Labor Condition Application (LCA) requirements

OISS obtains the prevailing wage determination to ensure that the university's wage offer is adequate.
OISS files a Labor Condition Application (LCA) with the Department of Labor.
OISS emails the LCA notice to the host department, which posts it at a conspicuous place for 10 business days. See posting notice instructions.
The department then returns LCA to OISS.

3. OISS prepares materials for the E-3's visa application
3. OISS prepares materials for the E-3's visa application

OISS prepares E-3 packet for the Australian National to take to U.S. Embassy.
OISS coordinates with the host department for delivery of the E-3 packet to the E-3 beneficiary.
HomeHost DepartmentsE3 VisasE-3 Extension/ Amendment/ COE/ COS
E-3 Extension/ Amendment/ COE/ COSThe definitions and procedures for making the following changes to an E-3 visa for beneficiaries already in the United States are provided below. Any scholar wishing to extend their current E-3 status, or file a new E-3 petition, also has the option of traveling back to Australia and filing directly with the Consulate overseas.
E-3 Extension of Status (EOS)
Beneficiary would like to extend employment end date.
E-3 Amendment
Beneficiary holds an E-3 at Northwestern, but needs to change details such as job title, job description, salary, or hours worked.
E-3 Change of Employer (COE)
Beneficiary is transferring to Northwestern University from another institution.
E-3 Change of Status (COS)
Beneficiary would like to change status from F-1/J-1/B-1 to E-3.
View Extend/Amend Instructions for E-3 beneficiaries
View Extend/Amend Instructions for E-3 beneficiaries
Steps for Host DepartmentHost Department Instructions for E-3 Visa Change of Employer, Change of Status, Amend or ExtendHost Department Instructions for E-3 Visa Change of Employer, Change of Status, Amend or ExtendOpenClose1. Host department collects and submits the following documents to OISS:
E-3 Department Request Form
Official University position confirmation/offer, which must cover dates of requested E-3, salary and job title.

For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For staff positions: Human Resources offer confirmation letter;
For research staff: research staff appointment;
For postdoctoral fellowships: postdoctoral research appointment.
E-3 Itinerary Letter (See example)
CV
Diploma
Transcripts
Credential Evaluation if degree is from overseas
Passport Bio page
Visa stamp issued by Consulate- if applicable
Visa entry stamp issued by Customs- if applicable
Any previous immigration documents, such as DS2019, I-20, I-612 waiver recommendation, or approval notices
Last three months paystubs, if applicable
Copy of W-2, if applicable
Employment letter from current employer, confirming employment start date-if applicable
I-94 record- if applicable
I-94 record- if applicable
$460 Processing fee check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (must be paid by the department). If the department would like to use Premium Processing, the department must also pay this fee ($2500).  All checks must be separate and all are paid to the Department of Homeland Security. See H-1B check request process for detailed instructions. OISS recommends waiting to request the checks from Accounts Payable until the prevailing wage has been determined so that the checks don't expire.
2. OISS and host department manage the prevailing wage determination (PWD) and Labor Conditions Application (LCA) requirements

OISS obtains the prevailing wage determination to ensure that the university's wage offer is adequate.
OISS files a Labor Condition Application (LCA) with the Department of Labor.
OISS emails the LCA notice to the host department, which posts it at a conspicuous place for 10 business days. See posting notice instructions.
The department then returns LCA to OISS.

3. OISS prepares E-3 petition

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the Department and/or Beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.
OISS files the application with USCIS and provides the Department and/or Beneficiary with a FedEx tracking number.

4. Receipt and Approval Notices are sent according to the following processing times
4. Receipt and Approval Notices are sent according to the following processing times

Within approximately 2-3 weeks, OISS emails the beneficiary,  host department contact, and Payroll Department confirming the receipt of the Receipt Notice. The Receipt Notice is required for employment to begin at Northwestern.
Within approximately three to four months, OISS emails beneficiary, host department contact, and Payroll Department confirming the decision made by USCIS. The Approval Notice and support documents will be ready for pick-up at the OISS.
If the Beneficiary is outside of the Evanston/Chicago area, the host department contact will pick up documents and send them to the beneficiary. The Approval Notice is required for any and all international travel.
Addressing Dependents
The E-3 beneficiary will have to file the I-539 form to extend his/her dependents' status. This I-539, including the following documents, should be included in thr E-3 extension/ amendment/ COS/ COE filing.
Completed form I-539
Copy of dependent(s) visa stamp page
Copy of dependent(s) passport biographical page
Printout of dependent(s) I-94
$370 fee check made payable to The Department of Homeland Security (payable by you or your department)
Copy of marriage certificate for spouse and/or birth certificate(s) for children. Include both original and English translation.

HomeHost DepartmentsO-1 Extraordinary Ability Visas
Individuals with Extraordinary Ability or Achievement (O-1)O-1 status is suitable for individuals who have attained national or international acclaim for extraordinary achievements in the sciences, arts, education, business or athletics. Extraordinary ability is defined as a high level of expertise and indicates that the person is one of a small percentage who has risen to the very top of his/her field. Find eligibility and required documentation.
Visa summary:

O-1 Visa-holders must:
O-1 Visa-holders must:

Possess extraordinary ability in the sciences, arts, education, business, or athletics;
Be able to provide extensive documentation of sustained national and/or international acclaim; and
Seek to enter the United States to continue work in their area of extraordinary ability. However, the position need not require the services of a person of extraordinary ability.


Visas can be applied for an initial period of 3 years and may be extended in one-year increments. There is no limit on the number of extensions allowed.
Dependents of the O-1 beneficiary hold O-3 status.
*Note: unlike the H-1B category, the Department of Labor is not involved in the O-1 process.
Steps for Host Department
Applying for an O-1 Visa
If you are currently living outside of the United States, an O-1 overseas petition will be prepared. View Instructions for an Initial 0-1 Visa.
Changing O-1 Status
If you are currently living in the United States in a different visa category (such as F-1, J-1, H-1B, etc.), then a Change of Status O-1 petition will be prepared.  View Instructions for an Changing Status of an 0-1 Visa.
Extending or Amending an O-1
If you currently hold an O-1 visa, but something is changing such as your host institution, end date, job details or similar, an O-1 extension will be prepared. View Instructions for Extending or Amending an 0-1 Visa.
O-1 Visa Compliance and Travel
O-1 Visa Compliance and Travel
It is important that the visa holder maintain their O-1 status by extending/amending your visa if necessary, and by following the visa's compliance requirements. View all visa requirements and restrictions.
Bringing O-1 Dependents (Spouses and Children)
Spouses and children under age 21 will fall in the O-3 visa category. This category carries certain restrictions, such as ineligibility to seek employment. Learn about O-3 visas and find application instructions.
HomeHost DepartmentsO-1 Extraordinary Ability VisasInitial O-1
Initial O-1The OISS only accepts O-1 requests from Northwestern sponsoring departments. The host department will collect information from the prospective O-1 and provide all of the documents to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) in one file. The OISS advisor will then review the documents and will work with an immigration attorney, the department, and the prospective O-1 beneficiary to file the petition to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
View Instructions for incoming O-1 beneficiaries
Instructions for Host Departments
1. Collect required documents and submit them to the OISS.
In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant (listed above), the host department is responsible for the following items:
O-1 Department Authorization Form
Offer Letter, including the O-1’s start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested O-1

For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For research staff: research staff appointment



Please note: Sponsoring department is responsible for USCIS fees. The attorney costs (varies by attorney and case) can be divided based on a pre-arranged agreement between the department and the O-1 beneficiary.
Questions? Contact the Office of International Student and Scholar Services. 
2. The OISS reviews materials for the O-1’s visa application.

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the department and beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.

3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition.
3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition.

Upon OISS approval, the beneficiary will select from a list of immigration attorneys to work with for the remainder of the case.
The immigration attorney, the department, the beneficiary, and the OISS work together to gather the evidence of extraordinary achievements and to file the petition.

4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS.

Within approximately two to three weeks, the attorney will notify beneficiary, the OISS and the department confirming a receipt notice of the filing.
Expect a decision within three to four months of the filing, unless the petition was filed using premium processing. The attorney will notify the beneficiary, department and the OISS of the decision, and if it is approved, will forward the notice.
HomeHost DepartmentsO-1 Extraordinary Ability VisasO-1 Extensions or Amendments
O-1 Extensions or AmendmentsCurrent O-1 visa holders need to apply for O-1 extensions in advance of their expiration. The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) only accepts O-1 requests from Northwestern sponsoring departments. The host department will collect information from the prospective O-1 and provide all of the documents to OISS in one file. The OISS advisor will then review the documents and will work with an immigration attorney, the department, and the prospective O-1 beneficiary to file the petition to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
The type of extension filed may vary slightly but the basic procedures are the same:
O-1 COE (Change of Employer) holds an O-1 at another institution but will be hired by Northwestern.
O-1 EOS (Extension) hold an O-1 at Northwestern but will extend employment end-date
O-1 Amend holds an O-1 at Northwestern but need to change details such as site of activity, job title, job description, salary, or hours worked

Instructions for O-1 beneficiaries
Instructions for Host Department
1. Collect required documents and submit them to the OISS
In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant (listed above), the host department is responsible for the following items:

O-1 Department Authorization Form
Offer Letter, including the O-1’s start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested O-1

For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For research staff: research staff appointment
For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For research staff: research staff appointment



Please note: Sponsoring department is responsible for USCIS fees. The attorney costs (varies by attorney and case) can be divided based on a pre-arranged agreement between the department and the O-1 beneficiary.
Questions? Contact the Office of International Student and Scholar Services.
2. The OISS reviews materials for the O-1’s visa application

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the department and beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.

3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition

Upon OISS approval, the beneficiary will select from a list of immigration attorneys to work with for the remainder of the case.
The immigration attorney, the department, the beneficiary, and the OISS work together to gather the evidence of extraordinary achievements and to file the petition.

4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS
4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS

Within approximately two to three weeks, the attorney will notify beneficiary, the OISS and the department confirming a receipt notice of the filing.
Expect a decision within three to four months of the filing, unless the petition was filed using premium processing. The attorney will notify the beneficiary, department and the OISS of the decision, and if it is approved, will forward the notice.
HomeHost DepartmentsO-1 Extraordinary Ability VisasChange of Status to O-1
Change of Status to O-1The OISS only accepts O-1 requests from Northwestern sponsoring departments. The host department will collect information from the prospective O-1 and provide all of the documents to the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) in one file.  The OISS advisor will then review the documents and will work with an immigration attorney, the department, and the prospective O-1 beneficiary to file the petition to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
View Instructions for O-1 beneficiaries
Instructions for Host Departments
1. Collect required documents and submit them to the OISS.
In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant (listed above), the host department is responsible for the following items:
O-1 Department Authorization Form
Offer Letter, including the O-1’s start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested O-1

For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For research staff: research staff appointment



Please note: Sponsoring department is responsible for USCIS fees. The attorney costs (varies by attorney and case) can be divided based on a pre-arranged agreement between the department and the O-1 beneficiary.
Questions? Contact the Office of International Student and Scholar Services. 
2. The OISS reviews materials for the O-1’s visa application.

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the department and beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.

3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition.
3. Preparation and filing of the O-1 petition.

Upon OISS approval, the beneficiary will select from a list of immigration attorneys to work with for the remainder of the case.
The immigration attorney, the department, the beneficiary, and the OISS work together to gather the evidence of extraordinary achievements and to file the petition.

4. Notice of Receipt and Approval Notice from USCIS.

Within approximately two to three weeks, the attorney will notify beneficiary, the OISS and the department confirming a receipt notice of the filing.
Expect a decision within three to four months of the filing, unless the petition was filed using premium processing. The attorney will notify the beneficiary, department and the OISS of the decision, and if it is approved, will forward the notice.

NOTE: Change of Status applicants must retrieve his or her Approval Notice documents from the OISS and present the original to the Payroll Office prior to starting employment in O-1 status.
HomeHost DepartmentsLPR SponsorshipLPR Categories
LPR Categories Sponsored by NorthwesternSpecial Note on Postdoctoral FellowsThe university cannot sponsor postdoctoral employees for permanent residence in an employment-based category. Those in a postdoctoral position can seek out self-sponsorship via the National Interest Waiver with the guidance of a licensed immigration attorney with OISS assistance.Northwestern University does not limit green card sponsorship to certain employment classifications (e.g. staff, research faculty) as long as the foreign national can meet governmental eligibility requirements. However, individual departments, schools, colleges, or other units may limit who they will sponsor or what categories of applications they will sponsor. Foreign nationals are not entitled to green card sponsorship. The University also cannot and will not guarantee the outcome of any immigration petition.
The two main regulatory requirements in the employment-based categories are that the positions are full-time and “permanent” in nature. While tenure-track positions are considered permanent, to qualify for sponsorship, the position itself does not need to be tenure-track. Positions that do not have a specified end date or maximum duration may qualify but many (e.g. Postdoctoral Scholars) do not. Positions that are renewed annually may still qualify as long as the intent is that the position will be renewed and funding is ongoing.
OISS assists with the following LPR requests:
Outstanding Professor or Researcher (EB-1B)
Tenured/tenure track positions as well as similarly permanent research positions may qualify for an application under the EB-1B category if the employee meets particular requirements and is recognized internationally as outstanding.
PERM Labor Certification with Special Handling for Faculty (EB-2)
PERM Labor Certification with Special Handling for Faculty (EB-2)
Positions that include teaching duties will generally qualify for “special handling” and are usually associated with tenure-eligible Professors, Instructors and Lecturers. This requires that the university file a labor certification within 18-months of the date of offer. 
Note: If a department or the beneficiary misses the 18-month window, or if a competitive recruitment was not conducted, then the standard labor certification regulations apply (see below).
PERM Labor Certification  (EB-2)
Green card applications for positions that do not qualify for Special Handling are normally filed under the basic PERM process, and generally applicable to staff positions.
National Interest Waiver (NIW/EB-2) or EB-1A (Extraordinary Ability)
National Interest Waiver (NIW/EB-2) or EB-1A (Extraordinary Ability)
Foreign nationals interested in pursuing a green card application that does not require the formal sponsorship of the University may arrange to have OISS case management support as well as departmental financial support, if previously agreed upon and terms accepted by both parties.
HomeHost DepartmentsLPR SponsorshipInternal LPR Process
Internal LPR ProcessLPR Department Request FormAccess the form for departments requesting Northwestern University's sponsorship for Legal Permanent Residency for faculty, researchers, or staff: LPR Department Request FormAfter a decision has been made to sponsor someone for LPR, the hiring department should submit the LPR Department Request Form to OISS.
Once OISS receives the request, university-approved outside counsel is obtained, and in-house case management begins in parity with chosen law firm.
General information for departments and beneficiaries
We STRONGLY recommend that H-1B status is maintained until the adjustment application (I-485) is approved. Extension beyond the six-year limit is possible, provided the labor certification or the I-140 Immigrant Petition has been pending for more than a year. Contact OISS for further details on filing extensions beyond six years.
Deans, Directors, and Chairs are responsible for signing process authorization forms and for designating signature authority for employment related immigration application documents to an appropriate individual in the hiring unit.
The hiring unit is responsible for payment of OISS internal processing fees as well as all costs associated with testing the labor market and filing a PERM labor certification. These expenses may not be passed on to the foreign national. The costs associated with attorney fees and USCIS processing fees for employment-based petitions, as well as self-sponsored immigration petitions, can be determined between department and beneficiary.
Processing time
The processing time varies greatly dependent on category and citizenship and is based on USCIS timelines and backlog for the year in which the petition was submitted. Timeline expectations can be discussed further with attorney input. It is reasonable to expect 6 months - 2.5 years.
Spouses & children
Dependents will be included on the I-140 Immigrant Petition. Including dependents on the I-140 enables them to apply for employment authorization, even if they are in H-4 status. Please refer to Applying for an EAD while in H-4 Status for more information
Likewise, as part of the Adjustment of Status application, dependents are also eligible to file an application for employment authorization document (EAD) and/or Advance Parole (travel authorization) to use in place of their current nonimmigrant status. Once an EAD is issued, the holder of the EAD may work and use the advance parole for travel. Both the Advance Parole and the EAD are granted for a limited amount of time. Therefore, there may be a need to request an extension of both the EAD and travel authorization. Applications for such extensions should be filed as soon as possible. Please discuss this extension with the attorney handling your green card application.
Address changes
The United States Postal Service (USPS) will not forward mail from USCIS even if there is a forwarding address on file. All addresses must be updated using Form AR-11 within 10 days of a change in address.
Prior to travel abroad
Prior to travel abroad
Please consult with the immigration attorney who filed your petition. Depending on where the petitioner is the process, travel could compromise the application.
HomeHost DepartmentsHost Department Forms
Host Department FormsResourcesVisa Types, Fees and Processing Times 
Visa Options Guide
Questions should be directed to Cara Mitchell Lawson, Assistant Director of Scholar ServicesThe forms on this page are intended for Northwestern department administrators supporting perspective international scholar visitors.
H-1B Visa Forms
Detailed information on H-1B visas, requirements, and steps for the host department can be found on our H-1B visa resource page.

H-1B Department Request Form
H-1B Itinerary Example
H-1B LCA Posting Notice
H-1B Beneficiary Departure Notice 

 
J-1 Visa Forms
Northwestern University is authorized to use the following types of J-1 exchange visitor (EV) categories: short term, researcher, professor, student intern. Please consult the following resources for additional guidance: J-1 Visa Types and consult  J-1 Visa Steps for Host Departments for detailed instructions depending on EV category.
Exchange Visitor DS-2019 Request 
J-1 Exchange Visitor Transfer-In Form
DS-2019 Department Request Form
English Proficiency Attestation
J-1 Student Intern Department Supplement
J-1 Student Intern Supervisor Evaluation Form
J-1 Exchange Visitor Check-In Form
J-1 Early Departure/Transfer Out Form
J-1 Out of U.S. Request
J-2 Dependent Request

Legal Permanent Resident (LPR)

LPR Department Request Form

B-1/WB Short Term Visitor Visa Forms
Review more information on our B-1/WB webpage.

B-1/WB Department Request Form
B-1/WB Letter Template

E-3 (Australian National Visa) Forms
The E-3 specialty occupation visa category is for Australian nationals. See detailed information at E-3 Visas.

 
E-3 Department Request Form
E-3 Itinerary Letter - Refer to H-1B itinerary example for a template that is also applicable to E-3
LCA Posting Notice and Instructions
TN Visa Forms
TN visa status is for qualified citizens from Canada and Mexico to temporarily engage in professional business activities. Learn more at TN Visas

TN Visa Request Form
TN Sample Letter

HomeResources
ResourcesOISS Portal GuideFor F-1 or J-1 Students OnlyYou will use the OISS Portal to submit requests for many benefits of your immigration status. 
Get Started Using the PortalPractical Matters: Living in the U.S.The resources in this section can help provide guidance as you adjust to life at Northwestern and in the United States.TaxesLearn moreSocial SecurityLearn MoreTravelLearn MoreDriving & Public TransportationLearn MoreHealth InsuranceLearn MoreHousingLearn MoreSpouse & FamilyLearn MoreLanguage ResourcesLearn MoreVirtual AdvisementConnect with an OISS Advisor via Zoom on WednesdaysWeb-in-Wednesdays
HomeResourcesOISS Portal Guide
OISS Portal GuideDuring your time as an F-1 or J-1 international student at Northwestern, you will use the OISS Portal to submit requests for many benefits of your immigration status including I-20 reprint requests for travel signatures, requests for internships using CPT or AT, part-time enrollment in your final term, and many other benefits associated with your immigration status.    Learn How to Use the PortalFor New Students, Current Students and AlumniAccess the Portal User Guides for instructions on how to login, navigate your profile, and submit requests.OISS Portal Guides
HomeResourcesTaxes
TaxesUnderstanding your U.S. Tax Obligations
Even if you did not earn any income, if you were physically in the U.S. on F or J status anytime between January 1st – December 31st 2023 and are considered a non-resident for tax purposes, you are obligated to file a Form 8843 with the IRS (the Internal Revenue Service, or ‘IRS’, is the U.S. tax authority).In addition, if you earned any taxable U.S. source income, you may need to file a federal tax return (Form 1040 NR) with the IRS. Depending on your individual circumstances, you may also need to file a state tax return(s).
If you are considered a "resident" for tax filing purposes, you will have different filing obligations. Read on to learn more.
Who is considered Resident or Nonresident for Federal Tax Purposes?
Who is considered Resident or Nonresident for Federal Tax Purposes?
Generally, international students on F-1 & J-1 visas are considered nonresident for their first five calendar years in the U.S.  F-1 & J-1 students usually become resident tax filers after being present in the U.S. for five calendar years.
Most international scholars and researchers on J-1 visas are considered nonresidents for tax purposes for the first two calendar years in the U.S. J-1 scholars usually become residents for federal tax purposes after being present in the U.S. for two (out of the past six) calendar years, including any prior time spent as an F-1 or J-1 visa holder.
If you’ve been in the US for longer than the five year (for students) or two year (for scholars) periods mentioned above, the Substantial Presence Test will determine your tax residency.Tax Filing Deadline
April 15, 2024 is the tax filing deadline day for residents and nonresidents who earned U.S. income to file Federal  tax returns for the 2023 tax year.Learn moreOISS has compiled many resources to assist you in understanding and filing your U.S. taxes. Follow the links below to learn more.How can OISS assist me?Northwestern's Office of International Student and Scholar Services connects international students scholars with a variety of tax resources.OISS Tax ResourcesOISS Sponsored Tax WorkshopsOISS contracts with Young & Associates, a Tax & Accounting Firm based in Chicago to provide online workshops to guide Northwestern International Students and Scholars through the complexities of U.S. income tax and filing requirements.OISS Tax Workshop ScheduleSprintax Tax Preparation SoftwareSprintax is non-resident tax preparation software. OISS partners with Sprintax to provide access to Sprintax for our international students and scholars who are considered non-resident filers.
to Sprintax for our international students and scholars who are considered non-resident filers. International students & scholars on F and J visas will receive instructions & a unique access code from OISS via email by late February.Learn more about sprintaxSprintax webinar schedule and registrationSprintax hosts a number of general nonresident tax webinars as well as a few focused on non-resident taxes for students on CPT and OPT.Sprintax WebinarsNorthwestern's Human Resources Foreign National Tax TeamInternational students and scholars who are employed by Northwestern University or those receiving a scholarship/fellowship from Northwestern will receive tax forms from NU each year. The Foreign National Tax Team (within NU's Office of Human Resources) can help you with tax questions.Foreign National Tax Team Assistanceunderstand basic tax formsHow do I know which form(s) to file?
What forms (if any) will I receive in the mail?
What is a Form 1042-S used for and will I receive one?learn about tax formsDetermining your tax filing statusBefore you begin your tax return, you will need to determine your federal tax filing status: nonresident tax filer or resident tax filer.
This status determines how you are taxed and which forms you need to fill out.
This status is only a tax filing status and does not mean that you are a resident for immigration or other purposes. Some students and scholars are considered to be resident tax filers even though they continue to have a nonimmigrant visa status.
Your tax filing status may change over time so it is a good idea to review these guidelines each time you complete your taxes.
Read on to learn more.
Non-resident tax filersStudents on F & J visas
Generally, F-1 and J-1 students are considered nonresident tax filers for their first five calendar years in the U.S.  F-1/J-1 students usually become resident tax filers after being present in the U.S. for five calendar years.
J-1 Scholars
J-1 Scholars
Most J-1 scholars are considered nonresident tax filers for the first two calendar years in the U.S.  J-1 scholars usually become residents for federal tax purposes after being present in the U.S. for two (out of the past six) calendar years, including any prior time spent as an F-1 or J-1 visa holder.
Employees of Northwestern & those receiving a scholarship or fellowship from Northwestern
If you are employed by Northwestern University or if you receive a scholarship/fellowship from Northwestern, the Human Resource Foreign Nationals Tax Team can help you with determining your U.S. tax residency status. 
Additional resources
Additional resources
To accurately determine your federal tax filing status, please see the IRS's website or Sprintax's blog page. If you are still not certain, you should create a Sprintax account as described in our Sprintax page. Sprintax will ask you a series of questions based on the substantial presence test to determine your residence status for federal tax filing purposes. Note, if Sprintax determines you are a resident filer, you will not be able to continue to file your taxes with Sprintax. Sprintax is ONLY for non-resident tax filers.Resident tax filersInternational students and scholars who meet the IRS's Substantial Presence Test are considered to be a U.S. resident for tax purposes. Resident filers have many options for filing their tax returns.
TurboTax is a popular tax preparation software for U.S. citizens as well as those considered resident filers for tax purposes.
You may also wish to hire a professional tax accountant. OISS recommends Alejandro Young of Young & Associates, LLC, an income tax and accounting services firm that specializes in all areas of US tax preparation, compliance, and problem resolution.Tax Treaty BenefitsU.S. tax treaties (also known as double taxation agreements (DTA) are specific agreements between the U.S. and foreign countries that outline how nonresidents will be taxed in each country.
Generally, under these tax treaties, residents of foreign countries (including foreign students and scholars) are taxed at a reduced tax rate and can benefit from exemptions on many different types and items of income.
Currently, the U.S. tax treaty network covers approximately 65 countries all over the world.
Sprintax offers a helpful resource on tax treaties on their their blog page: I am a non-resident of the U.S. Can I claim any tax treaty benefits?
Or refer to the IRS Publication 901: U.S. Tax TreatiesState TaxesIf you work or invest in a state that has an income tax (Illinois does have an income tax), it’s likely that you must file a state tax return. This is a separate document to your federal tax return. States are independent from one another in their taxing authority, and all state tax forms differ in some respects. In other words, the type of document you must file – as well as the deadline to file – differs from state-to-state. 
All resident and nonresident aliens for tax purposes who earned income in the state of Illinois in 2023 must complete and file Illinois Form 1040. If you worked in another state in 2023, then you will need to file a return for that state.
Sprintax can help you prepare your state tax return(s) for an additional fee. The access code provided by OISS does NOT cover the cost of state tax preparation for non-resident filers. The access code covers only filing of the federal forms for those considered non-residents for tax purposes.
An Important Disclaimer
This information is intended only for international students and scholars with income sources and level typical of students and scholars at Northwestern University. Although the information contained in this site has been reviewed carefully and should be adequate to assist most international students and scholars, it is not a substitute for advice obtained from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or a qualified tax accountant. If your visa status has changed in the past year, or you believe you have a complicated tax issue, please consult the IRS or a qualified tax accountant.
In addition, while the tax preparation software, Sprintax, is being provided to help international students and scholars who are considered non-resident filers with your filing obligations, you are individually responsible for verifying that the correct information has been entered into the tax preparation software and included on all forms and/or other documents printed or derived from the tax preparation software, and ultimately responsible for any errors or omissions. 
OISS staff are not qualified or allowed to answer any tax-related questions or provide individual tax advice beyond the information provided on our website.
HomeResourcesTaxesOISS Virtual Tax Workshops
OISS Virtual Tax WorkshopsLearn more about the presenterYoung & Associates Tax & Accounting Services
Was 2023 your first year in the United States? Have you been in the United States for more than 5 calendar years? Possess a J or F visa? Do you need help or have questions about income tax filings? Are you afraid or nervous about tackling the tax filing process on your own? Have you filed tax returns in previous years but were unsure if you filed correctly? Do you have family members who have accompanied you on your stay in the United States? If you have answered “Yes” to any of these questions, you are invited to attend one of the following tax workshops for international students and scholars.
Alejandro Young from Young & Associates, LLC, will present on the tax filing requirements and rules for international students and scholars. Alejandro has more than 20 years of experience in the area of tax services for international students and scholars and has been providing tax filing workshops for the University since 2018.
Tax Workshop Dates:
Fri., Feb 16, 2024:  3:00 - 5:00 PM (CT)  -  Event Details with Zoom Link
Wed., March 13, 2024:  5:00 - 7:00 PM (CT) - Event Details with Zoom Link
Sat., March 30, 2024:  1:00 - 3:00 PM (CT) - Event Details with Zoom Link
Tues., April 9, 2024:  2:00 -  4:00 PM (CT) - Event Details with Zoom Link
HomeResourcesTaxesSprintax Tax Preparation Software
Sprintax Tax Preparation SoftwareFor international students and scholars who are considered non-resident filersAbout SprintaxOISS has teamed up with Sprintax to provide F-1 and J-1 international students and scholars with a unique access code for Sprintax, an easy-to-use tax preparation software designed for nonresident students and scholars in the U.S. 
By late February 2024, the unique access code providing a waiver of the  Federal tax filing fee will be sent to qualifying F-1 & J-1 international students and scholars who were part of the Northwestern community during tax year 2023.
There are a limited number of Sprintax codes offered by Northwestern’s OISS for each tax year. Please file as early as possible. We usually have enough codes for all our international students and scholars (who are considered non-resident tax filers); however, we cannot guarantee a Sprintax discount code, especially after the April tax deadline.
The code does NOT cover state tax preparation fees
Sprintax can do your state taxes as well for an additional fee. OISS does not provide discount codes for preparation of state taxes. 
Sprintax is only for non-resident tax filers
After you login to Sprintax, you will be asked a series of questions about the time you have spent in the US over recent years. Sprintax will then determine your tax status. If it determines that you are a “nonresident alien” (NRA) for federal tax purposes, you can continue to use the software and respond to a series of guided questions. Sprintax will then complete and generate the tax forms you need to send to the tax authorities. Watch this Video about Residency Status from Sprintax.
However, if Sprintax determines that you are a resident alien for federal tax purposes, you won’t be able to continue using the software. Read more about Residency for Tax Purposes below.
US Tax filing Obligations for International Students and Scholars
US Tax filing Obligations for International Students and Scholars
Watch this short video from Sprintax to learn more:
Read on to learn more:What will Sprintax help me with?Sprintax will help you…
determine which tax forms you need to complete. 
determine your “residency for tax purposes.” 
determine if are eligible for tax treaty benefits or a standard deduction. 
assist with completion of the Form 8843 or Form 1040NR as appropriate. 
prepare a completed federal tax form for you to print, sign, and mail in and what documents to attach to it. 
How do I get started?After you receive your Sprintax access code from OISS and have gathered the required documents (see next question below), go to Sprintax, create an account (or login to your account if you have one from last year), and complete the online questionnaire.
You will be asked a series of questions about the time  you have spent in the US over recent years. Sprintax will then determine your tax  status. If it determines that you are a “nonresident alien” (NRA) for federal tax purposes, you can continue to use the software and respond to a series of guided  questions. Sprintax will then complete and generate the tax forms you need to send to the tax authorities.
However, if Sprintax determines that you are a resident alien for federal tax purposes, you won’t be able to continue using the software.What should I do if I've forgotten my password for Sprintax?You can reset your password by clicking the “Forgot your password?” link in the log-in area. Sprintax will then send you a password reset email to the email address you gave us. If you don't see a password reset email in your inbox, be sure to check your spam folder in case it’s gone there.
Please make sure you use a valid and current email address and the same one that you used to register with Sprintax.What documents do I need in order to use Sprintax? You will need the following…
Sprintax access code available from OISS  (in late Feb/early March)


Passport 
I-20 or DS-2019 
Social Security Number (SSN) or ITIN if you had any US sources of income(Note: a SSN or ITIN is not needed if you had not income and the Form 8843 is the only form you have to file.)
US entry and exit dates found stamped in your passport or accessed in the travel history portion of your I-94 record on the CBP website 
Foreign and US addresses
Tax forms that have been mailed to you or that you have accessed from the University (including, but not limited to W-2, 1042-S, and 1099). Be aware that you may not have any of these, or you may have more than one. For example, the W-2 is used by an employer to report how much salary they paid to an employee during a year, and what taxes were withheld, and a copy of the W-2 is sent to the employee. If you did not work as an employee, you will not receive a W-2. If you worked for 3 different employers in the same tax year, you should receive a W-2 from each of them.  See chart to below to understand various tax forms:





Tax Form


Description



W-2

This form reports your wage earnings if you worked.
If you had more than one employer you should get a W-2 from each employer. It is issued by the  end of January for the previous year. Make sure all employers from last year have an up-to-date  address for you.
If you did NOT work, you will not receive a W-2.



1042-S
1042-S

This form is used to report:

Stipend, scholarship, fellowship income and travel grants (not tuition reduction or exemption)
Income covered by a tax treaty
Payment for other types of services (eg by the semester as a note-taker)

If you received this type of income, the 1042-S will be mailed to you by 15 March by the payer.
Note: Only Nonresident Aliens receive this form. If your tax status changes to a Resident Alien you will not get a 1042-S. Sprintax can help you check your tax status if you’re not sure.


Form 1099
This form reports miscellaneous income. Can be interest on bank accounts, stocks, bonds, dividends, earning through freelance employment


Form 1098
This form is NOT needed and can NOT be used for a nonresident tax return because Non-resident Aliens are not eligible  to claim education expense tax credits. If you think you MIGHT eligible, see more info on our webpage about the 1098-T.
Understanding "Residency" for tax purposesThere are three main types of residency for tax purposes in the US:

residents
non-residents
dual-status aliens

***Most F-1 visa holders will be considered non-residents for tax purposes.***
Substantial presence test
You’ll be considered a resident for tax purposes if you pass the Substantial Presence Test.
The IRS uses the substantial presence test to determine whether an individual who is not a US citizen or a US permanent resident should be taxed as a resident or a nonresident alien for a specific year. The main difference is that US residents are taxed on their worldwide income while nonresident aliens have to report only their US-sourced income.
With this test, you’ll need to be present in the US on at least:
31 days or more throughout the current year, and
183 days or more in the period of 3 years that includes both the current year and the 2 years before that, this includes:
All of the days you were physically in the US within the current year, and
1/3 of the days you were physically present in the US within the first year before the current year, and
1/6 of the days you were physically present in the US within second year before the current year.
What is a nonresident for tax purposes?
If you do not pass the substantial presence test you will be classified as a nonresident alien for tax purposes. This means you will only be taxed on US-sourced income. As well as this, if your country of residence has signed a tax treaty with the US, you may be either partially or completely exempt from tax.
How can I determine my residency status while in the US on an F-1 visa?
In general, international students who are in the US on an F-1 visa are considered nonresident aliens for tax purposes for the first five calendar years of their stay in the US.
 
Read more: Your US Tax Residency Status ExplainedHow do I file my taxes using Sprintax?
Gather documents you will need:  see list above.
Gather documents you will need:  see list above.
Create or Log into your Sprintax AccountYou will receive an email from OISS (we anticipate by late February) providing you with a link to Sprintax to set up your account as well as your unique code to use on Sprintax. This unique code will cover the costs of the federal tax return ($51.95) and Form 8843 at no cost to you.
Open your new Sprintax account by creating a User ID and password or if you have an existing account on Sprintax you can login using your existing credentials. If already have a Sprintax account and you forgot your Sprintax password, use this Forgot Password link to reset your password.
Answer some simple questions  and follow the Sprintax instructions:
If you did not earn any US Income: Sprintax will generate a completed Form 8843 for you and each of your dependents (if you have any).If you did earn US Income: Sprintax will generate your “tax return documents”, including form 1040NR, depending on your circumstances. 
Enter the unique code you received via email from OISS in the "review your order" section to the receive the discount for preparation of your FEDERAL tax Forms.
 If required, complete your state tax return After you finish your federal return, Sprintax will inform you if you need to complete a state tax return. If so, you will have the option to use Sprintax for an additional fee. However, it is your choice to use them or to do the state tax return on your own. OISS is unable to cover the cost of state tax filing.
Read the instructions for filing/mailing your tax return(s)You will be required to download, print and sign your federal tax return and mail it  to the IRS. Depending on your circumstances, you may be able to E-file your Federal tax return. However, this will depend on certain eligibility criteria. You can learn more about E-filing in this Sprintax blog - https://blog.sprintax.com/nonresident-federal-tax-efiling-live/If you have a state filing requirement, you must also mail this to the tax authorities.Finally, if you only need to file Form 8843, this will also need to be mailed to the IRS.
I'm not an international student, can I use Sprintax?If you’re a temporary visitor to the US on a H1B, H2B, L or B1 working visa, J1 Exchange visitor or foreign performing artist, athlete or entertainer on a P or O visa, Sprintax can prepare your US income tax return. However, you must be classified as non-resident for the entire tax year. If you’re unsure, Sprintax can review your circumstances and let you know.What is the difference between Sprintax and TurboTax?There is a very important difference:
Sprintax tax preparation software was designed for and can only be used by individuals who are "nonresident tax filers."
TurboTax tax preparation software was design for and can only be used by individuals who are "resident tax filers."
Watch this video to learn more:

SprintaxNeed Sprintax support? If you need help while using Sprintax, you can contact their support team using the options below
Email hello@sprintax.com 
24/7 Live Chat Help is available. You will need to log-in (or create your account with the unique access code sent via email from OISS) to access the chat help service. 
Sprintax Webinar Schedule 2023/2024Sprintax Nonresident Tax Webinars (General)In these free tax webinars, international students, scholars and professionals will be run througheverything they need to know about nonresident tax for the 2023 tax season.Topics will include who must file, tax residency, FICA, State returns, implications of misfiling aswell as how to use Sprintax to prepare a compliant tax return.
Thursday, December 14th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Thursday, January 25th @ 11am CT – Register here
Wednesday, February 7th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Wednesday, February 28th@ 11 am CT – Register here
Monday, March 11th @ 3pm CT – Register here
Thursday, March 28th @ 2pm CT – Register here
Wednesday, April 3rd @ 1pm CT – Register here
Thursday, April 11th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Monday, April 15th @ 10am CT – Register here

 Sprintax Nonresident Tax Overview for OPT/CPTTopics covered in these webinars will include residency for tax purposes, tax liabilities whenon OPT/CPT and pre-employment tax forms when on OPT/CPT. The Sprintax team will alsoprovide an overview of Sprintax Forms which can be used to prepare your pre OPT/CPTemployment tax documents.
Thursday, November 16th @ 11am CT – Register here
Wednesday, December 13th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Tuesday, January 23rd @ 12pm CT – Register here
Wednesday, February 28th @ 1pm CT – Register here
Thursday, March 21th @2pm CT – Register here

Important
Sprintax access is provided as a helpful service to international students and scholars. OISS staff are not qualified or allowed to answer any tax-related questions or provide individual tax advice beyond the information provided on our webpage. The information provided is intended as a helpful resource. Any questions or concerns should be directed to Sprintax, a certified tax preparer or the IRS (Internal Revenue Service).
HomeResourcesTaxesSprintax Webinars
Sprintax WebinarsLearn moreSprintax Tax Preparation Software
OISS Tax Resources
 
In these free tax webinars provided by Sprintax, international students, scholars and professionals will be run through everything they need to know about nonresident tax for the 2023 tax season. Topics will include who must file, tax residency, FICA, State returns, implications of misfiling aswell as how to use Sprintax to prepare a compliant tax return.

Thursday, December 14th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Thursday, January 25th @ 11am CT – Register here
Wednesday, February 7th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Wednesday, February 28th@ 11 am CT – Register here
Monday, March 11th @ 3pm CT – Register here
Thursday, March 28th @ 2pm CT – Register here
Wednesday, April 3rd @ 1pm CT – Register here
Thursday, April 11th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Monday, April 15th @ 10am CT – Register here

 

Sprintax Nonresident Tax Overview for OPT/CPT
Sprintax Nonresident Tax Overview for OPT/CPT

Topics covered in these webinars will include residency for tax purposes, tax liabilities whenon OPT/CPT and pre-employment tax forms when on OPT/CPT. The Sprintax team will alsoprovide an overview of Sprintax Forms which can be used to prepare your pre OPT/CPTemployment tax documents.

Thursday, November 16th @ 11am CT – Register here
Wednesday, December 13th @ 12pm CT – Register here
Tuesday, January 23rd @ 12pm CT – Register here
Wednesday, February 28th @ 1pm CT – Register here
Thursday, March 21th @2pm CT – Register here
HomeResourcesTaxesForeign National Tax Team
Foreign National Tax TeamFor international students/scholars/employees receiving source income from Northwestern University (including wages and fellowship/scholarship funds).
OISS collaborates with the Foreign National Tax Team within the Office of Human Resources to ensure Northwestern international students and scholars employed by Northwestern or those receiving other source income in the form of scholarship/fellowship funds from NU are provided necessary information and comply with U.S. tax laws.
The Foreign National Tax Team can assist with :

Questions about Northwestern payroll
Questions about tax treaties
Taxation questions about Northwestern issued payments
Questions or potential discrepancies with tax forms (1042-S or W-2) issued by Northwestern
Any issues or needed assistance with FNIS

The Foreign National Tax Team CANNOT assist with:
The Foreign National Tax Team CANNOT assist with:

Completing any tax forms 
Providing tax advice
Questions about 1098-T forms which are issued by the Student Finance Department






Learn More
View more information on Northwestern's Human Resources website at Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.




Walk-in hours for NU's Foreign National Tax Team:
A representative from the HR Foreign National Tax Team will be available for in person office hours:

Thursdays: 10:00 AM - 4:00 PM (CT) at HR, 1800 Sherman Avenue. 
NOTE: In-person walk-in hours are CANCELLED on March 28, 2024 (see virtual option below)





Virtual office hours for NU's Foreign National Tax Team
Thursday, March 28th, 10 AM - 4 PM via Zoom.




Questions?
Send email to fntax@northwestern.edu.




Related Content
New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals
Related Content
New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals

HomeResourcesTaxesTax Forms
Tax FormsForm 8843
Form 8843 is not a U.S. income tax return. It is an informational statement required by the IRS for nonresidents for tax purposes. It should be filled out for every nonresident present in the U.S. for the previous year, including spouses, partners, and children.
Who Should Complete ONLY Form 8843?
If you are a nonresident tax filer, and have NO U.S. source income in 2023 you only need complete the IRS Form 8843 to fulfill your federal tax filing obligation. Continue reading to find out how you can file this form.
What Does it Mean to Have No U.S. Source Income?
It means you did not receive wages, salary, awards, prizes, or taxable scholarship or fellowship (i.e. the amount of scholarship or fellowship that exceeds the amount of your tuition [consider only your tuition; do not include any other expenses such as books, or room and board) from a U.S. institution, organization, or company. Financial support, such as sabbatical salary or a scholarship, from your home country or an organization outside the U.S. is not considered U.S. source income.
Important Note!
If you are a nonresident tax filer with U.S. source income and are using Sprintax to file your tax return, your Form 8843 will be included in the forms that Sprintax generates for filing.
Form 1040-NR
 Form 1040-NR is the U.S. Nonresident Alien Income Tax Return Form
You must file Form 1040-NR, U.S. Nonresident Alien Income Tax Return, only if you have income that is subject to tax, such as wages, tips, scholarship and fellowship grants, dividends, etc.
If you did not have any income, you must still file the Form 8843 (see above)
Form 1040
If you did not have any income, you must still file the Form 8843 (see above)
Form 1040
If you are considered a resident tax filer, you will use the Form 1040 when filing your federal tax return for the previous year. Forms that you may receive reporting incomeTax forms that have been mailed to you or that you have accessed from the University (including, but not limited to W-2, 1042-S, and 1099) will be needed to file your taxes. Be aware that you may not have any of these, or you may have more than one. For example, the W-2 is used by an employer to report how much salary they paid to an employee during a year, and what taxes were withheld, and a copy of the W-2 is sent to the employee. If you did not work as an employee, you will not receive a W-2. If you worked for 3 different employers in the same tax year, you should receive a W-2 from each of them.  See chart to below to understand various tax forms:
Tax Form


Description


Forms from Northwestern University






 
W-2



This form reports your wage earnings if you worked during the tax year.
If you had more than one employer, you should get a W-2 from each employer.
It is issued by the  end of January for the previous year.
Make sure all employers from last year have an up-to-date address for you. If you have not received this document by January 31, be sure to contact your employer right away to request it. 
If you did NOT work, you will not receive a W-2.
W-2s for employees of Northwestern University will be available each year by Jan 31st. Log in to myHR and click on “Employee Self Service” in the “Pay” section to access your electronic W-2.
Form W-2s are mailed to the most recent home address in myHR (managed separately from CAESAR).
If you need to request a reprint of your W-2, follow the HR W-2 Reprint Request instructions for both current and former employees.
If you need additional assistance, email askHR@northwestern.edu.





 
1042-S


This form is used to report:

Stipend, scholarship, fellowship income and travel grants (not tuition reduction or exemption).
Income covered by a tax treaty.
Payment for other types of services (e.g., by the semester as a note-taker).

If you received this type of income, the 1042-S will be mailed to you by 15 March by the payer.
Note: Only Nonresident Aliens receive this form. If your tax status changes to a Resident Alien, you will not get a 1042-S.
All 1042-S forms will be sent to the local address for any active employees or students and to the foreign address for anyone who has since left the University.
Northwestern will mail Form 1042-S forms by March 15th.
For additional information including reprint requests see Human Resources 1042-S Form Information


If you have questions about the Form 1042-S, please call the Payroll Department on the Evanston campus at (847) 491-7362 or on the Chicago campus at (312) 503-9700.





Form 1099

This form reports miscellaneous income. This can be interest on bank accounts, stocks, bonds, dividends, earning through freelance employment, etc.




Form 1098

This form is NOT needed and can NOT be used for a nonresident tax return because non-resident aliens are not eligible to claim education expense tax credits. If you think you MIGHT eligible (qualify as a resident for tax filing purposes), see more info on our webpage about the 1098-T.
Viewing & printing 1098-Forms
Questions about the 1098-T form should be directed to the Student Finance Department:Evanston Campus: studentaccounts-ev@northwestern.eduChicago Campus: studentaccounts-chicago@northwestern.edu





Questions?
Sprintax Assistance
Sprintax offers 24/7 live chat service. Simply log in to Sprintax and access the live chat feature. 
Northwestern's Foreign National Tax Team (within the Office of Human Resources)
Learn more and connect with the Foreign National Tax Team.
HomeResourcesTaxesForm 1098-T
Form 1098-TWhat is a Form 1098-T?Northwestern is required by the United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to report payments received for qualified tuition and related expenses for the tax year ending on December 31 of the preceding calendar year. It includes financial information, such as tuition charges, scholarships received, and payments made.
The Form 1098-T is the tax document used to report these payments. Students (and their families) who file income taxes in the United States can use the Form 1098-T as an informational tax document used to determine eligibility for income tax credits based upon amounts they have spent for education. Currently, these federal tax benefits include the American Opportunity Credit, the Lifetime Learning Credit, and the tuition and fees deduction.
Most international students are NOT eligible to claim education tax credits with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. 
International students who may be eligible are:
Lawful permanent residents (green-card holder)
married to a U.S. citizen or permanent resident
those who may be claimed as a dependent by a U.S. citizen or permanent resident
those who have been in the U.S. long enough to file federal income tax returns as a resident
Nonresident aliens are generally not eligible to claim any of the education-related tax credits or deductions for which Form 1098-T is intended to serve as documentation.
You cannot claim these tax benefits if you fill your tax return on  Form 1040-NR.
For more eligibility information, see IRS Publication 970. Northwestern University, including the Office of International Student and Scholar Services, cannot provide tax advice. For additional information, contact a professional tax adviser or the IRS.I received an email from NU Student Finance stating that I need to provide a valid address or Social Security Number before a certain date in January related to the tax document Form 1098-T. What does that mean and why did I receive that email?Northwestern University is required by law to provide SSN/ITIN and valid address information to the IRS for all Northwestern students who registered for classes, received financial aid, or received scholarships during  tax year.
If you are a nonresident alien international student, the email does not apply to you.
If you are considered a U.S. resident for tax purposes and plan to claim education tax credits, you will need the Form 1098-T and should follow the directions in the email.
For more information determining your tax residency status, please refer to the Internal Revenue Service’s website at: https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/determining-alien-tax-status or consult a professional tax adviser.
Again, MOST F-1/J-1 international students are considered nonresidents of the United States for U.S. tax purposes.Why didn't I receive a Form 1098-T?Not all students will receive an IRS Form 1098-T.  According to IRS guidelines, a 1098-T statement will not be provided to non-resident aliens, international students, or where qualified tuition and related expenses are entirely waived or paid fully with scholarships.I am a nonresident alien for tax purposes. Is there a different tax form I should receive?Maybe. Some, but not all, international students will receive Form 1042-S (Foreign Person's U.S. Source Income Subject to Withholding). The two largest groups of foreign visitors who receive Form 1042-S include [1] students who received scholarships in excess of their qualified tuition for at least one academic term and [2] Northwestern University employees who received tax treaty benefits in their paychecks during the year.
For more information on Form 1042-S, please see https://www.northwestern.edu/hr/essentials/pay-taxes/tax/1042-s-form-information.html.Important
Northwestern University, including the Office of International Student and Scholar Services, cannot provide tax advice or answer tax questions beyond the information provided on Northwestern’s website. Contact a professional tax adviser or the IRS for additional information or questions.
HomeResourcesTaxesTax FAQs
Tax FAQsDo I really need to file taxes?YES! ALL international students and scholars who were in the U.S. for any period of time during any calendar year must file a federal tax return.
Even if you did not earn any income, if you were physically in the U.S. on F or J status anytime between    January 1st – December 31st, 2023, you are obligated to file a Form 8843 with the IRS (the Internal Revenue Service, the U.S. tax authorities).
Meanwhile, if you earned any taxable US source income, you may need to file a federal tax return with the IRS. Depending on your individual circumstances, you may also need to file a state tax return(s).What is the basic background of U.S. taxes? I just don't understand it.When students get a paycheck from a campus job, or Graduate Assistantship (or get a scholarship or tuition waiver in exchange for performing services for a college or earn interest on an account at a local bank), you may owe income tax to the US government and to one or more states.
For example, if a student is supposed to make $300 in a month, his or her paycheck is always a little bit less than the actual wages (like maybe $250) because an estimated amount of tax has been “withheld” from it.  Students need to fill out and mail in tax forms to the IRS (or file the forms electronically) for any year in which they received taxable income by April 15 of the following year.
If more tax was withheld than the student owes, he or she will receive a refund. If more tax is owed, it must be paid when the return is due. When filling out tax forms, students will include information on how much money they made, how much money was already taken out in “tax withholding” from their paychecks, how long they’ve been in the US, and what country they are from.
After completing the federal tax forms using Sprintax, students can fill state tax forms with Sprintax on their own (for an additional fee).  Note that your Sprintax access code covers the only services for federal tax forms. Not all states have an income tax, and the tax laws for the states that do are considerably different, but the general rule is that any state return you must file is due on the same date as the US return.  Illinois is a state that has a state income tax, so students in Illinois who received taxable income must also file a state income tax form. Learn more about Sprintax.
OISS also sponsors virtual tax workshops led by a local tax expert.  Please attend an OISS Sponsored Tax Workshop for additional guidance.When will I receive my Sprintax access code? The OISS anticipates sending instructions and access codes to F-1/J-1 students and scholars by the end of February. The information and access codes will be sent via email.I am an international student/scholar, and I did not have job or any other earned income in 2023. 
Do I still need to file?Yes, you still have to complete a basic form, the IRS Form 8843.
All F-1 and J-1 students (and their F-2/J-2 dependents), are required to file the IRS Form 8843 regardless of whether they have income in the U.S. or not for the first 5 calendar years they are in the U.S.
All J-1 non-students and their J-2 dependents, are required to file the IRS Form 8843 regardless of whether they have income in the U.S. or not for the first 2 calendar years they are in the U.S. in a 7-year period. 
Utilize Sprintax to generate and complete the Form 8843. Once you create your account with Sprintax (after you receive your access code from OISS), Sprintax will generate a completed Form 8843 for you and each of your dependents (if you have any).  Read more about Sprintax.
I had income from a campus job last year. Where can I find my W-2 form?NU typically posts W-2 forms on the HR website by the end of January. A Form W-2 issued to those who earned employment income from Northwestern. Employment income includes any income from an on-campus job, assistantship wages, temporary wages, supplemental payments, teaching and research wages.   This does not include any income exempt from taxes under a tax treaty or non-employment wages such as scholarship/fellowship.What is a Form 1042-S?Northwestern issues a Form 1042-S to nonresidents receiving scholarship/fellowship, independent contractor, royalties, prizes and award payments and any payments receiving tax treaty benefits.  Payroll mails them by March 15 of the following year for use in preparing annual tax returns.  Once a student becomes a tax resident, they are no longer issued a 1042-S for these income types unless they are on a tax treaty. See NU's Human Resources webpage with Form 1042-S Information
unless they are on a tax treaty. See NU's Human Resources webpage with Form 1042-S Information for more details.I am an international student or scholar who worked for Northwestern University in 2023. How can I learn more about what tax forms I will receive?Please consult the Tax Information for Foreign National on Northwestern's Human Resources website.Can international students use Turbotax?No. We are aware that some  F-1 international students have chosen TurboTax to manage their tax returns, but Turbotax is a service for U.S. residents.
While TurboTax – the biggest online tax preparation service in the US – offers a fantastic product that helps millions of U.S. residents prepare their taxes and claim refunds, their offering can only be used by U.S. residents.
If you do use TurboTax to file your US taxes, you will be filing as a U.S. resident. This means your tax return will be inaccurate and you may be subject to fines and penalties.What is a ITIN (Individual Taxpayer Identification Number) and do I need one?Nonresidents who will receive stipends from a scholarship or fellowship, but will not be employed, such as a graduate assistantship or temporary employment, will not be eligible for a SSN and must instead apply for an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN).  Students who receive an ITIN and later become eligible for a Social Security Number, because of employment such as assistantships or temporary employment, must apply for a SSN and cancel their ITIN.
For full information, please consult the Social Security & Tax Identification Numbers section of Northwestern's HR website.Do I need an ITIN if I have a Social Security Number?No. An ITIN is issued if you do not have an do not qualify for an SSN. If you have already applied and received your SSN, you do not need to apply for an ITIN. You must use your SSN instead.Who is considered  "Resident" or "Nonresident" for federal tax purposes?
Generally, most international students and scholars who are on F and J visas are considered nonresidents for tax purposes. International students on J-1 and F-1 visas are considered nonresident for their first five calendar years in the US.
Scholars/Researchers on J-1 visas are considered nonresidents for two out of the last six calendar years in the U.S.
The Sprintax software will determine your residency status in step one after you create your account.
If you have been in the U.S. for longer than the five (students) or two (scholars) year periods, the "Substantial Presence Test" will determine your tax residency.
Important
 OISS staff are not qualified or allowed to answer any tax-related questions or provide individual tax advice beyond the information provided on our webpage. The information provided is intended as a helpful general resource. Any questions or concerns should be directed to Sprintax, a certified tax preparer or the IRS (Internal Revenue Service).
HomeResourcesSocial Security
Social SecurityWhat is a Social Security number?
A Social Security Number (SSN) is a unique nine-digit identification number assigned to individuals by the U.S. government for tax and other purposes. The primary purpose of an SSN is to track an individual's earnings and their contributions to the Social Security system, which is a federal program.
In addition to its use in the Social Security system, an SSN is required for employment, and often for banking and credit purposes. Many government agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), also use SSNs as a means of identifying individuals for tax reporting purposes.
What is a Social Security card?
What is a Social Security card?
A social security card is required to work in the United States. On the card is a unique 9-digit Social Security Number (SSN) issued by the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA). The card (and your SSN) will be necessary to work in the U.S. and to file taxes. A social security card is NOT a work permit.
Example SS card:
Who is eligible to apply for a Social Security number?
Only students or scholars in active immigration status. If your SEVIS record is not “active”, the Social Security Administration will not be able to verify your status.
IMPORTANT:  Newly arrived F-1 and J-1 students must wait until they have entered the U.S., enrolled in classes at Northwestern, and completed the check-in process with OISS before applying for an SSN. OISS cannot update your SEVIS record to "active" until after you have both enrolled in classes AND completed the required immigration check-in with OISS. 
Students and scholars in active immigration status in the following situations may apply for an SSN:
F-1 students with a job offer letter
F-1 students with approved CPT or OPT work authorization
J-1 students with a job offer and written work permission from their DS-2019 sponsor
J-1 visiting scholars
J-2 dependents with work permission from USCIS (EAD)
H-1B & O-1 visa holders
Individuals with other types of immigration status allowing employment
Note: F-2 dependents are not eligible for Social Security Numbers.
Learn how to apply for an SSN
Steps to Apply for an SSNKeep your Social Security number secureYour SSN is sensitive, personal identification information. It is important to keep it safe and out of the hands of scammers who wish to use it to utilize your identity or credit history.Tips to keep your SSN secure
Do not carry your Social Security card with you unless you need it for a specific purpose.
Memorize your SSN for times you will need it.
Do not type or write your SSN in the body of an email or text message.
Do not send your SSN or image of your Social Security Card as an email attachment.
Do not send your SSN or image of your Social Security Card as an email attachment.
Be careful sharing your SSN by email, text, voicemail, and fax. For example, your SSN could get intercepted and read after you send your information. There are sometimes ways to help keep your information safe — for instance, by using a VPN on an unprotected Wi-Fi network. But the safest way to share may be face to face with someone you know and trust.
OISS does not need a copy of your Social Security Card and will never ask you for your SSN.
Common scenarios in which your SSN may be requested
When an employer is setting up payroll and tax paperwork at a new job.
When setting up a new bank account, opening a credit card, or applying for a loan.
When a business needs to check your credit in order to apply for an apartment, sign up for utilities, or get a contract-based mobile phone plan.
What to do if you suspect your Social Security number has been compromised or used fraudulentlyCall the Federal Trade Commission at 877-438-4338, or file a report with the agency online. You can also reach the fraud hotline for the Social Security Administration’s Office of the Inspector General at 800-269-0271, or submit a report to the SSA Inspector General office online.
The Social Security Administration offers the ability to block electronic access to your number. It could be a good option if you need to lock down your account following a fraud incident. Call 800-772-1213 to request a block.Additional Resources
Social Security Administration - official website
International Students and Social Security Numbers - SSA publication
Foreign Workers and Social Security Numbers - SSA publication
Identity Theft and your Social Security Number - SSA publication
What to know about identity theft - from the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Need assistance?
What to know about identity theft - from the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Need assistance?
If you have any trouble obtaining the SSN, please ask to know the name of the person helping you and for a letter from the Social Security Office detailing the reason of the problem. Next, please contact your OISS Advisor with this information as well as your SSN application number.
HomeResourcesSocial SecurityHow to apply for an SSN
How to apply for an SSNWho can apply for an SSN & required documentation
Who can apply for an SSN and required documentation for international students and scholars



Visa/Employment Type


Eligible?


Required Documentation





Newly arrived F-1 or J-1 student who is not yet enrolled in classes and/or has not yet completed OISS check-in (Initial SEVIS Status)

Not yet eligible 


Newly arrived students must complete OISS check-in and be registered in classes at NU before OISS can update your SEVIS status to Active. New students are in Initial SEVIS Status until after  both registering for classes and completing OISS check-in. You can view your "SEVIS Status" on your student profile page in the OISS Portal at the top of the page. 
You must be in "Active" SEVIS status to be eligible to apply for a SSN.



F-1 on-campus employment (including graduate assistantships)
F-1 on-campus employment (including graduate assistantships)

Yes, up to 30 days before employment begins.
Not eligible after employment has ended.



Job offer letter from on-campus employer with wet ink signature. See sample
Social Security Authorization letter from OISS. Submit SSN letter request via OISS Portal.
Form I-20
Passport
Most recent I-94 record




F-1 CPT

Yes, up to 30 days before CPT begins.
Not eligible after employment has ended.



I-20 with CPT endorsement from OISS. Submit CPT request via OISS Portal
Passport
Most recent I-94 record




F-1 OPT

Yes, from start date listed on EAD. Not eligible after employment has ended.
 
*Students can also apply for SSN as part of the I-765 portion of the OPT application for USCIS.


I-20 with OPT endorsement from OISS. Submit OPT request via OISS portal
Passport
Most recent I-94 record




F-1 no employment
Not eligible



F-2 
Not eligible
F-1 no employment
Not eligible



F-2 
Not eligible




J-1 on-campus employment
NOTE: J-1 students are eligible to apply for an SSN with or without an employment offer. See below instructions for J-1s with no employment offer. 


Yes, up to 30 days before employment begins.
Not eligible after employment has ended.


Pre-approval for on-campus work from OISS.  Submit On-Campus Employment request via the OISS Portal
Social Security Authorization letter from OISS. Submit SSN letter request via OISS Portal.
DS-2019
Passport
Most recent I-94 record





J-1, no employment


Yes, eligible



Social Security Authorization letter from OISS. Submit SSN letter request via OISS Portal
DS-2019
Passport
Most recent I-94 record




J-1 Academic Training (AT)

Yes, up to 30 days before AT begins.
Not eligible after employment has ended.


DS-2019 with AT endorsement from OISS. Submit AT Request via OISS Portal
Passport
Most recent I-94 record




J-1 scholar
J-1 scholar

Yes, on or after program start date on DS-2019 and after completion of immigration check in with OISS.
Not eligible after employment has ended.


DS- 2019
Passport
Most recent I-94 record




J-2 

Yes, if J-2 has an EAD.
Not eligible after employment authorization has ended.


EAD card
DS-2019
Passport
Most recent I-94 record




H-1B & O-1 visa holders
Yes, on or after the start date on your Form I-797.


Form I-797 approval notice
Passport
Most recent I-94 record





SSN Application Instructions
STEP 1: Gather required documents

See table above based on your current status.
Students with on-campus employment need a job offer letter from the on-campus employer. See a sample
SSN Authorization Letter from OISS - This letter is required for F-1 students with on campus employment and  J-1 students (degree seeking students sponsored by Northwestern). This letter can be requested via the SSN Letter Request in the OISS Portal.
J-1 students on Fulbright's visa sponsorship must contact their Fulbright advisor for the SSN authorization letter.
J-1 Short Term Scholars, J-1 Research Scholars, and J-1 Professors do not need SSN authorization letters.
J-1 Student Interns should contact OISS at intoff@northwestern.edu to request an SSN letter.
STEP 2: Complete the Online Social Security Number Application on the SSA website
Begin the process online to apply for a new or replacement Social Security card. After submitting the online application, ensure you print, annotate or take a screen shot of your confirmation number (O number). You must complete the application process by visiting your local Social Security Administration office with your confirmation number and required documentation within 45 calendar days.
Online Social Security Number Application
STEP 3: Go to the Social Security Administration (SSA) Office 
Once you have each of the documents ready and have submitted the online SSN application, you must go in person to your local SSA office with hard copy immigration documents to apply for the SSN. Be sure to take your confirmation number (O number) assigned during the online application. You may find office locations on the SSA website.
The following SSA Offices are closest to the Evanston and Chicago campuses:  Evanston – 2116 Green Bay Rd., Evanston, IL 60201
Chicago – 605 West Washington Boulevard, Chicago, IL 60661
STEP 4: Wait for your Social Security card to arrive in the mail
Once your application for an SSN has been approved by the SSA, the SSA will send a Social Security card to the address you provided on your application form.  The usual processing time is 2 - 4 weeks. If additional security procedures are necessary, processing times may range from 4-8 weeks. The SSA will not issue a number in advance of the card being mailed.
Most likely you will receive a Social Security card that has the notation: "Valid for work only with DHS Authorization." SSA issues this type of card to students and dependents in F-1, J-1, and J-2 immigration status because the card alone does not authorize employment.
See example:
See example:
After you receive your SSN, it’s best not to carry the card in your wallet. Instead, memorize the number, and keep the card in a safe place with your other important documents. Don’t lose your card!
HomeResourcesSocial SecuritySample On-Campus Employment Letter
Sample On-Campus Employment LetterNote:  Letter should be on Northwestern University letterhead
(Date)
To Whom it May Concern:
This is to certify that (student's name) has been offered, or is already working in, general on-campus employment.
(Describe the nature of the student's job; e.g. teaching assistant, research assistant, library aid, etc.)
Start Date:
Number of Hours/Week:
Employer contact information:

Employer Identification Number (EIN for NU is 362167817)
Student's Immediate Supervisor
Supervisor's telephone number:

Supervisor's Signature (Original in wet ink)
Supervisors Title
Supervisor's Signature (Original in wet ink)
Supervisors Title

HomeResourcesTravel
TravelTravel Restrictions and RequirementsFor the most part, you can easily travel domestically within the United States, as long as you bring your passport and appropriate documentation. Traveling outside of the United States may carry some restrictions and  requires additional documentation and approvals. Rules vary by visa status.

F-1 & J-1 TravelInternational students in F-1 or J-1 status may travel within the U.S. or abroad during their tenure at Northwestern.Employee TravelEmployees may travel within the U.S. or abroad, but they must follow certain restrictions and carry valid identification and travel documents. See restrictions for H1-B visa-holders, E-3 visa-holders, TN visa-holders and employees in the process of becoming Legal Permanent Residents. How do I get a travel signature on my I-20 /DS 2019?To submit an" I-20 Reprint (or DS-2019 Reprint) Request' for travel, follow these steps:
Log in to the OISS Portal.
Go to portal section #3 "Requests & Documents" on the far right.
Scroll down to find the appropriate request: "Reprint I-20" or "Reprint DS-2019"




For F-1 students


For J-1 students






Complete and submit the request. 
You will receive an email notifying you when your I-20 or DS-2019 reprint with travel signature is ready to access and print from the portal.
Entering and Exiting the U.S.Proof of COVID-19 vaccination no longer required to board a flight to the U.S.As of May 12, 2023, noncitizen nonimmigrant air passengers no longer need to show proof of being fully vaccinated with an accepted COVID-19 vaccine to board a flight to the United States.
For additional details, refer to the Center for Disease Control (CDC)'s proclamation on safe resumption of global travel. Policies and Procedures Impacting Re-EntryLearn more about the U.S. Department of State's Visa Revocation Policy, as well as Automatic Visa Revalidation.
HomeResourcesTravelF-1 and J-1 Travel
F-1 and J-1 TravelInternational students and scholars in F-1 or J-1 status may travel within the U.S. or abroad during their time at Northwestern.
OISS reminds students & scholars:

Get your I-20/DS-2019 signed if you are traveling outside the U.S. See below for travel signature validity information.
Check your passport expiration. To re-enter the U.S., a passport must be valid 6-months into the future from the next date of entry.
Don't forget your I-20/DS-2019 and passport. When preparing to return to the U.S., be sure these documents are with your person on the plane -- you will need them before you have access to checked baggage to pass through passport control.

OISS reminds F-1 students on OPT and STEM OPT:
OISS reminds F-1 students on OPT and STEM OPT:

While on OPT or STEM OPT, the travel signature is valid for 6 months from when it was signed.
When traveling abroad while on OPT be sure to carry your EAD card, as you will need to present it for re-entry into the United States. All EAD cards say 'not valid for reentry' This means that the card alone does not guarantee reentry but that you must also carry the I-20 and passport with valid visa.
Students on OPT must carry the following when traveling abroad to re-enter the U.S.:


SEVIS Form I-20 with valid travel signature within the last six months;


Valid F-1 visa stamp inside passport;


Current passport, valid at least six months into the future;


Employment Authorization Document (EAD) Card (Note: All EAD cards say 'not valid for reentry' This means that the card alone does not guarantee reentry but that you must also carry the I-20 and passport with valid visa.)
If you are, or will be employed, we recommend that you carry your offer letter.
F-2 dependents of F-1 students on OPT should carry photocopies of their spouses EAD card and employment offer letter, in addition to a SEVIS Form I-20, valid F-1 visa stamp, and current passport.

 

How does a student obtain a travel signature on the Form I-20 /DS 2019?F-1 and J-1 Students
To submit an" I-20 Reprint (or DS-2019 Reprint) Request' for travel, follow these steps:

Log in to the OISS Portal.
Go to portal section #3 "Requests & Documents" on the far right.
Scroll down to find the appropriate request: "Reprint I-20" or "Reprint DS-2019"





For F-1 students



For J-1 students
For F-1 students



For J-1 students







Complete and submit the request. 
You will receive an email notifying you when your I-20 or DS-2019 reprint with travel signature is ready to access and print from the portal.
I'm an international scholar on a J-1 visa. How do I obtain a travel signature on my DS-2019? 
Please contact your designated OISS Advisor to request a travel signature endorsement on your Form DS-2019.  Your advisor will send you a digital copy of your DS-2019 with the travel signature endorsement via email attachment.
Alternatively, you can also visit the OISS Office at 1902 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL during open office hours  with your current DS-2019 document in hand to receive a new travel signature.
Travel Abroad
International students & scholars in F-1 or J-1 status and their dependents need the following to leave and re-enter the U.S.
SEVIS Form I-20 or DS-2019 with a valid travel signature (see above) endorsed by the OISS; Customs and Border Protection officials will need to see your printed paper I-20 for re-entry to the U.S.
Valid visa stamp (pasted inside your passport); and
Current passport, valid at least six months after the date of your re-entry (unless your passport was issued by a country belonging to the "Six Month Club" and is exempt from the 6-month rule). Please see March 2022 DHS list of Countries that Extend Passport Validity for an Additional Six Months After Expiration. 

Make sure your documents are valid (unexpired)
If your F-1 or J-1 visa is unexpired, you can use that visa to re-enter the U.S.
If you are planning to take a cruise, please check with your cruise provider to find out whether you will pass through Customs in any country you may enter, and whether you will be subject to U.S. Customs & Border Patrol inspection upon your return to the U.S.
What is a travel signature?A travel signature is relevant only to F-1 students or J-1 students and scholars (and their dependents) who are planning to travel abroad and return to the U.S. in F or J status. This includes alumni who remain in F or J status for post-graduation F-1 OPT or J-1 AT. You must have an unexpired travel signature on the date you re-enter the U.S. Travel signature endorsement and validity
Continuing F-1/J-1 Students/Scholars : The signature on page 2 of the I-20 or on the bottom right corner of page 1 of the DS-2019 is valid for 12 months. If your re-entry date to the U.S. is within 12-months from the last signature, you will be eligible to re-enter on that I-20/DS-2019.  However, if the signature on your I-20 or DS—2019 will be more than one year old by the time you re-enter U.S., then a new travel signature is required.
Information for F-1 students on OPT/STEM OPT: The signature on page 2 of the OPT I-20 is valid for 6 months from when it was signed. If your re-entry date is within 6 months from the last signature, you are eligible to re-enter on that I-20.  However, if you re-enter after the 6-month time frame, a new travel signature is required.
Information for J-1 Short-term Scholars and J-1 Students on Academic Training: Travel signatures are valid for 6 months or until the end of program, whichever is sooner.
How to Obtain a Travel Signature on your Form I-20Getting a travel signature on your I-20 is easy!
Option 1: 
Submit an “I-20 Reprint Request” at the OISS Portal and indicate you need a travel signature.  Processing time is 5 business days, so please submit your request in a timely manner. You will receive an email notifying you when your updated I-20 with a travel signature has been processed and is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. Options to receive your document:
To receive your Form I-20 with a travel signature:
Print your updated I-20 with the travel signature from the “Documents” section of your OISS Portal. You will need to sign in ink in the student attestation section of the document. This is the easiest and fastest way to receive your I-20 with travel signature. 

Option 2:

Visit the OISS Office at 630 Dartmouth Pl., Evanston during open office hours with your current  I-20  document in hand to receive a travel signature.
How to Obtain a Travel Signature on your Form DS-2019J-1 Students:

Submit a "DS-2019 Reprint Request” at the OISS Portal and indicate you need a travel signature.  Processing time is 5 business days; please submit your request in a timely manner. You will receive an email notifying you when your updated Form DS-2019  with a travel signature has been processed and is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal.
Print your updated DS-2019 with the travel signature from the “Documents” section of your OISS Portal. You will need to sign in ink in the student attestation section of the document. 

J-1 Scholars:

Please contact your designated OISS Advisor to request a travel signature endorsement on your Form DS-2019.  Your advisor will send you a digital copy of your DS-2019 with the travel signature endorsement via email attachment.
Alternatively, you can also visit the OISS Office at 1902 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL during open office hours  with your current DS-2019 document in hand to receive a new travel signature.
Required Documents for Optional Practical Training (OPT) StudentsStudents on OPT must carry the following when traveling abroad to re-enter the U.S.:


SEVIS Form I-20 with valid travel signature within the last six months;


Valid F-1 visa stamp inside passport;


Current passport, valid at least six months into the future;
Current passport, valid at least six months into the future;


Employment Authorization Document (EAD) Card (Note: All EAD cards say 'not valid for reentry' This means that the card alone does not guarantee reentry but that you must also carry the I-20 and passport with valid visa.)

If you are, or will be employed, we recommend that you carry your offer letter.

F-2 dependents of F-1 students on OPT should carry photocopies of their spouses EAD card and employment offer letter, in addition to a SEVIS Form I-20, valid F-1 visa stamp, and current passport.Travel within the U.S.
Traveling within the country is un-complicated and simple:

Carry two forms of photo identification (including your passport) and your form I-20/DS-2019.
You do not need an additional visa stamp or travel signature to travel within the US. Looking to visit somewhere warm? That includes Hawaii, Puerto Rico or the U.S. Virgin Islands.

 Travel Tips
Travel Tips

Before traveling, make photocopies of ALL documents: passport, I-20/DS-2019, visa stamp, I-94 record. Leave a set of copies at home or with a friend and carry a copy with you separate from your originals. Lost or stolen documents are much easier to replace with photocopies!
Carry your COVID-19 vaccine card with you when you travel and take and save a photo of your vaccine card document as well.
If traveling abroad, bring your financial documentation showing proof of necessary funds to cover tuition and living costs. (i.e. bank statements, funding letters, etc.)
If you have lost your passport , please visit the Department of State's website for instructions on what to do next and how to file for replacement documents.
Remember to print and save your I-94 record each time you return to the U.S.  Visit www.cbp.gov/I94 to print your I-94 record.
HomeResourcesTravelEmployee Travel
Employee TravelEmployees may travel within the U.S. or abroad, but they must follow certain restrictions and carry valid identification and travel documents. These restrictions vary according to visa category. 
For beneficiaries currently in the US, please consult your OISS advisor regarding all plans to travel outside the US before the anticipated approval of your petition. Leaving the US while a change of status, extension, amendment, or change of employer petition is pending approval by USCIS may be considered abandonment of the petition or  result in additional visa processing delays and employment disruption. We can coordinate the submission of your petition to accommodate your travel plans with advanced notice.H-1B Visa-HoldersDocuments Required Travel Within the U.S.

Valid Passport
Copy of H-1B approval notice

Traveling Abroad
Valid Passport
Copy of H-1B approval notice

Traveling Abroad

Original H-1B approval notice;
Copy of the Labor Condition Application (LCA);
Valid passport (6 months into the future) with valid H-1B visa stamp;
Copy of your I-129 petition;
Updated employment verification letter from NU department stating that you are currently employed, dates of employment, salary, job title and brief description of job duties.

Dependents
When traveling, H-4 dependents should carry:

Copy of the H-1B Approval Notice;
Copy of the H-1B petition most recently submitted to USCIS;
Other relevant documents related to H-4 status (Approval Notice, H-4 visa stamp);
Valid passport.
Expired Visa StampsIf your H-1B visa stamp has expired, you must obtain a valid H-1B visa stamp to re-enter the U.S.
Exception: If you are traveling in Canada or Mexico and will stay for less than 30 days, you can re-enter the U.S. on an expired visa stamp. Longer visits will require a valid stamp to re-enter.Status ChangesIf you are changing or extending your H-1B visa, you will need to obtain an H-1B visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in H-1B visa status.
This includes H-1B beneficiaries with a change of status (COS) within the U.S. who are currently in H-1B status with an Approval Notice. If the visa stamp is from another visa category (e.g. F-1), then you will have to obtain an H-1B visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in H-1B visa status.
If you are an H-1B beneficiary traveling while an H-1B extension is pending and will be re-entering the U.S. close to the expiration date of your current H-1B,  you are encouraged to carry the documents listed above plus the extension Receipt Notice and copies of the extension petition while traveling.
If you are an H-1B beneficiary who is changing employers (COE) and traveling with a valid visa stamp from another employer, you are required to bring all of the documents listed above.
Border CrossingWhen crossing the U.S. border, be prepared to answer specific questions about your current H-1B petition. You may be asked about: the nature of your employment (i.e. NU department, job title); specific job duties (i.e. job description); exact work location; or salary.
Occasionally individuals are selected for secondary inspection. Reasons for this inspection might include:
Your travel documents are incomplete or you do not have the proper documents or visa
You appear to have previously violated your immigration status
You appear to have a criminal record that is of concern
You have been selected for a random inspection

If you are pulled into secondary inspection, please answer all questions directly, truthfully and to the best of your knowledge.E-3 Visa-HoldersDocuments RequiredTraveling abroad

Valid E-3 visa stamp
Valid passport

Although not required for travel, the following documents may support your E-3 status. They are on file in the OISS office and are available upon request.

Original E-3 approval notice (I-797A): If you received your E-3 visa stamp in Australia, you will not have this document
Original E-3 extension receipt notice (I-797C)
Copies of USCIS approval (COS/COE) petition
Copies of USCIS extension (EOS) petition
E-3 visa support letter
E-3 status letter
Please request these documents from your scholar advisor.Status ChangesStatus changes
If you are extending your E-3 visa, and you plan to travel while the extension is pending, you may be able to enter the U.S. close to/after the expiration of your current E-3.
However:

Please notify the OISS of your plans before departure.
Take your extension receipt notice (I-797C) and copies of the extension petition with you while traveling.
TN Visa-HoldersDocuments RequiredTraveling abroad

Canadian TN holders may travel and re-enter the U.S. as long as the period noted on the I-94 is valid.
Mexican TN holders must ensure that the TN visa stamp in their passport is valid for readmission.
Travel with all documents needed to prove TN status, as each entry is up to the discretion of the border officer.
Status changesIf you are extending your TN visa, traveling while the extension is pending with the USCIS may create complications.
Please notify the OISS of your plans before departure.
The OISS will then request that USCIS send the electronic approval notice to the nearest U.S. consulate/embassy (for Mexican TN-holders) or location of pre-flight inspection/border crossing (for Canadian TN-holders).
O-1 Visa-HoldersDocuments RequiredTravel within the U.S.

Valid passport
Copy of O-1 approval notice

Traveling abroad

Original O-1 approval notice;
Valid passport (6 months into the future) with valid O-1 visa stamp;
Copy of your I-129 petition;
Updated employment verification letter from NU department stating that you are currently employed, dates of employment, salary, job title and brief description of job duties.

 Travel for DependentsWhen traveling, O-3 dependents should carry:
Travel for DependentsWhen traveling, O-3 dependents should carry:

a copy of the O-1 Approval Notice
copy of the O-1 petition most recently submitted to USCIS
any other relevant documents related to O-3 status (Approval Notice, O-3 visa stamp)
a valid passport.
Expired Visa StampsIf your O-1 visa stamp has expired, you must obtain a valid O-1 visa stamp to re-enter the U.S.Status ChangesIf you are changing or extending your O-1 visa, you will need to obtain an O-1 visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in O-1 visa status.
This includes O-1 beneficiaries with a change of status (COS) within the U.S. who are currently in O-1 status with an Approval Notice. If the visa stamp is from another visa category (e.g. J-1), then you will have to obtain an O-1 visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in O-1 visa status.
If you are an O-1 beneficiary traveling while an O-1 extension is pending and will be re-entering the U.S. close to the expiration date of your current O-1, you are encouraged to carry the documents listed above plus the extension Receipt Notice and copies of the extension petition with him/her while traveling.
If you are an O-1 beneficiary who is changing employers (COE) and traveling with a valid visa stamp from another employer, you are required to bring all of the documents listed above.
Border CrossingWhen crossing the U.S. border, be prepared to answer specific questions about your current O-1 petition. You may be asked about: the nature of your employment (i.e. NU department, job title); specific job duties (i.e. job description); exact work location; or salary.
Occasionally individuals are selected for secondary inspection for various reasons. If you are pulled into secondary inspection, please answer all questions directly, truthfully and to the best of your knowledge.Pending Status for Legal Permanent ResidentsPrior to any travelPlease consult with the immigration attorney who filed your petition. Depending on where you are in the process, travel could compromise your application.Travel Tips
Before traveling, make photocopies of ALL documents: passport, visa status approval notice, visa stamp, I-94 record. Leave a set of copies at home or with a friend and carry a copy with you separate from your originals. Lost or stolen documents are much easier to replace with photocopies!
If you have lost your passport, please visit the Department of State's website for instructions on what to do next and how to file for replacement documents.
Remember to print and save your I-94 record each time you return to the U.S.  Visit www.cbp.gov/I94 to print your I-94 record.
HomeResourcesTravelElectronic I-94
Electronic I-94
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) use an automated I-94 (record of admission) process. An electronic copy of your I-94 will be available online at www.cbp.gov/I94 after your arrival to the U.S.
This electronic copy will be printable and still necessary when proving immigration status or applying for benefits such as a driver’s license or Social Security Number.
Please check your I-94 record after each trip into the U.S. to confirm that your "Admit Until Date" is as expected.

For those in F and J status, the "Admit Until Date" should list “D/S” or “Duration of Status” 
For those in H, E, O, and TN status, the "Admit Until Date" should match either the status document (i.e., approval notice) end date or 10 days beyond that date if you were given a 10 day grace period.
Please also confirm that your Class of Admission is correct for your status (i.e., J-1, H-1B, F-1, etc.).
Travel
A new I-94 record is created each time you enter the U.S. After each arrival back in the U.S., log on and take a screen grab of your I-94 entry record to ensure that you are maintaining a record of this travel. Keep a running log of your I-94 entry records - you may have several after your time at Northwestern.
No action is necessary when departing the U.S. for I-94 purposes.
Tips for Accessing Your I-94 Card Online

Try entering your name exactly as it appears on your passport between the << >>.  
Try entering your name exactly as it appears on your visa stamp.
Try entering the date the day before you actually entered the U.S.
Try entering the date the day after you actually entered the U.S.

If you continue to have trouble, please contact the Deferred Inspection Site for Customs and Border Protection:
Address:     536 S. Clark Street, Suite 131, Chicago, IL 60605
Hours:         8:00 am - 3:00 pm, Monday - Friday
Phone:       312-886-3356
I-94 Correction Instructions:   i94chi@cbp.dhs.gov
HomeResourcesTravelPolicies and Procedures Impacting Re-Entry
Policies and Procedures Impacting Re-EntryFamiliarize yourself with policies and procedures that can impact your visa and the re-entry process.Visa Revocation PolicyAutomatic Visa RevalidationVisa Revocation PolicyOpenCloseU.S. Department of State may be revoking non-immigrant visas for individuals arrested for or convicted of driving while under the influence or driving while intoxicated in the previous five years. If the arrest/conviction occurred prior to the date of a recent visa application, then this policy may not apply if an application for a visa was assessed and a visa was issued. If a visa has been revoked as a result of this policy, an individuals may still obtain a new visa to come to the U.S. 
What does this mean for you?
What does this mean for you?
If you have had an arrest/conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or driving while intoxicated in the U.S., and if this arrest/conviction occurred after you obtained a visa to come to the U.S., it is possible that your visa has been revoked without you being aware of it.
Some individuals across the U.S. have been contacted by the visa post that issued their visa to inform them that their visa had been revoked.  Others have learned of the revocation of their visa when they attempted to return to the U.S. from a trip abroad.  If you had such an arrest/conviction, and if you plan to leave the U.S. intending to return, we suggest that you contact the visa post that issued your visa to inquire whether your visa is still valid. You should do so well in advance of your trip, e.g. before purchasing a plane ticket and when you still have time to make changes in your plans. We also recommend that you do not leave the U.S. until you have taken steps to address the matter. If the individual whose visa has been revoked has dependents in the U.S. in F-2, J-2 or H-4 status, the dependents’ visas will also be revoked. It is important to understand that this requirement does not affect your status in the U.S., only your visa. Remember that your visa is needed to
does not affect your status in the U.S., only your visa. Remember that your visa is needed to enter the U.S. but once you have entered, your visa does not have to remain valid. You must, however, have a valid I-20 (F-1/F-2), valid DS-2019 (J-1/J-2) or I-797 Approval Notice (H-1B/H-4). If you are not planning a trip abroad in the near future, this requirement does not affect you, even if you have been arrested/convicted, until you do seek to reenter the U.S. after a trip abroad. Please note that this information is not at all related to the recent election in the United States. Further, if you find that your visa has been revoked, or you are concerned, please consult with your regular OISS International Student or Scholar Advisor to discuss your options. The OISS can also refer you to legal representation should the need arise.Automatic Visa RevalidationOpenCloseYou are eligible for Automatic Visa Revalidation if:
you are an F-1/J-1 student or J-1 Exchange Visitor
your F/J visa stamp has expired
you plan to visit Canada, Mexico or an adjacent island (list of eligible islands) for less than 30 days                   

This means you can re-enter the US, even if your visa stamp has expired.  You will be allowed to re-enter the US one time (this DOES NOT renew or extend your visa stamp). 
Check with your OISS Advisor to review your specific situation. The following resources provide additional information:
Automatic Revalidation for Certain Temporary Visitors from U.S. Customs and Border Protection
Automatic Revalidation webpage from U.S. Department of State
Automatic Visa Revalidation is not very common, so the Customs & Border Patrol official or foreign border officer may not know what it is.  It is your responsibility to print the documents above, in case you need to explain the process to the officer.  Questions?  Please contact your OISS advisor.
HomeResourcesDriving & Public Transit
Driving and TransportationExplore potential transit options, including driving and using public transit.  DrivingDriving in the U.S. requires an understanding of rules of the road, insurance requirements, licenses and more.Driver's License and Other ID CardsIn the State of Illinois, there are three different forms of license/IDs:
A Driver's License is used for driving and identification (banking, traveling, etc.) and is only available to those with an SSN.  See example image:
An Illinois State Identification Card is used for identification only (when banking, traveling, etc.) and is only available to those with an SSN.  A state ID card does NOT license you to drive.  See example:
A Temporary Visitor Driver's License (TVDL) is used for driving ONLY and is available to non-citizens of the United States who have been granted temporary, legal entry into this country and are temporarily residing in the State of Illinois and ineligible for a Social Security number.See example TVDL :
The Illinois Secretary of State website explains the application requirements and steps for an Illinois  Driver’s License, State ID Card, and Temporary Visitor Driver’s License.    The Acceptable Identification Document Chart lists documents that may be used as forms of identification to provide proof of legal name, date of birth, Lawful status, Social Security number and IL residency when applying for an Illinois driver’s license or ID Card. Temporary Visitor's Driver's License (TVDL)Temporary Visitor Driver's License:
To apply for an Illinois Driver’s License or Non-Driver’s Identification Card (State ID), the Illinois Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) asks you to provide either an SSN, or documentation that you are not eligible for a SSN.
If you are NOT eligible for a SSN (needed to apply for an IL Driver's Licence), you may apply for a Temporary Visitor Driver’s License (TVDL).
If you have been issued an SSN, you are eligible to apply for a driver's license. 
The IL Secretary of State Document Requirements to obtain a Driver's License is a helpful resource. Please note that "Group C - Social Security Acceptable Identification Documents" indicates: An applicant applying for a Temporary Visitor Driver’s License (TVDL) is not required to present documents from Group C. Instead, the applicant must sign a declaration on the TVDL application that the applicant is, at the time of application, ineligible to obtain a Social Security number.
Please note that TVDL applications are accepted only at certain DMV facilities in IL. Please consult the Illinois Secretary of State TVDL Program publication for detailed instructions as well as IL DMV (Department of Motor Vehicle) office locations which will accept TVDL applications.Driving in the United States and Illinois Rules of the RoadPlease reference the Illinois Rules of the Road handbook published by the Illinois Secretary of State DMV (Department of Motor Vehicles) to learn about: 

Traffic laws
Traffic laws 


Roadway signs 
Driver’s license application process, requirements and exams 
Laws and responsibilities related to owning a vehicle in the state of Illinois 
Safe driving tips 
Procedures and laws related to traffic violations and crashes 
Preparing for the DMV driving test in IllinoisePermitTest offers free DMV practice tests and are presented in both English and Spanish. Please note that ePermitTest is NOT affiliated with Northwestern University; we are sharing it as a resources to help our international community prepare for driving in Illinois and taking the required driving tests.
Helpful links:
Illinois Rules of The Road Practice Test 2022
Online Drivers Education Course to Prepare for the Illinois Permit Test in 2022
Illinois Law on Required Auto InsuranceIllinois law requires all motor vehicles registered and operated in Illinois to be covered by liability insurance, which covers property damage and/or injuries you may cause others in an accident. (Trailers are not required to have liability insurance.) The following liability insurance minimum amounts are required for compliance with the law:  

 $25,000 for injury or death of one person in an accident. 
 $50,000 for injury or death of more than one person in an accident. 
 $20,000 for damage to property of another person.
You must carry your insurance card in your vehicle and show it upon request by any law enforcement officer. Your insurance company should send you an insurance card, usually when your policy is issued or renewed. For more information, see the Illinois Secretary of State Mandatory Vehicle Insurance brochure. 
Types of Auto Insurance Coverage 
According to Illinois law, the owner of a car must maintain insurance coverage. The minimum insurance coverage required by law is called liability. Liability coverage pays, up to certain limits, the sum for which you become legally responsible if you injure someone or damage their car. The following other types of coverage are optional:
Uninsured motorist: Protects you and your passengers if you are injured by an uninsured or hit-and-run driver, but only if the other driver is legally liable because of negligent driving. (Note that some insurance companies automatically include this coverage in their policies.) 
Collision: Pays for your losses if your car is damaged in a collision or single car accident. This coverage is valuable if the collision cannot be proven to be someone else's fault. 
Comprehensive: Pays for your loss if your car is stolen or damaged by fire, hail, vandalism, or most other non-collision causes.
Insurance Agents, Brokers and Companies 
Auto insurance in the Chicago area is often expensive. Some companies offer the possibility of a "good student" discount with their policies for students with certain GPAs. An insurance agent works exclusively for one insurance company. A broker or independent insurance agent works with many different insurance companies and policies and can compare different rates for you.  
Before you purchase insurance, make sure the agent/broker and insurer you select is licensed by the Illinois Department of Insurance (IDOI).  
The IDOI Consumer Auto Insurance page has many helpful resources including:
Auto insurance definitions 
Auto insurance shopping guide 
Steps for filing a claim with your insurance company.  
If you Have an Automobile AccidentChapter 7 of the Illinois Rules of the Road handbook explains what to do if you are involved in or come upon a traffic accident.  Be familiar with the procedures and keep this information in your car along with the car's registration and insurance paperwork.
If you are involved in an accident, you will need to present your driver’s license, car registration and valid auto insurance card.  Failure to follow correct procedures after an accident may result in fines or legal action. An insurance claim occurs when there is an accident and charges are made against the insurance policy. A claims adjuster from the insurance company reviews the facts of the accident and authorizes payment of a claim against an insurance policy; they should notify you what the insurance company will cover and what part of the bill (if any) you may be responsible to cover. What To Do During a Traffic Stop or when you Hear a Police Siren When you see police lights or hear a siren, pull your car over to the nearest safe area to stop as soon as possible. Carefully review chapter 4 “Traffic Laws” of the Illinois Rules of the Road handbook to familiarize yourself with proper action when stopped by law enforcement.  Vehicle Registration and License Plates The State of
action when stopped by law enforcement.  Vehicle Registration and License Plates The State of Illinois requires residents to register their motor vehicles through the Illinois Secretary of State’s (SOS) office to legally drive on public roadways. If you purchased your car from a dealer, they will take care of sending the documents to the SOS office. If you bought your vehicle from a private seller, you must register the vehicle in person.
Front and rear license plates are required on most vehicle types, with the exception of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, and trailers. License plates are purchase by and belong to the vehicle owner, so they can be transferred from one vehicle to another.  See the Illinois Secretary of State Vehicle Services page for more information on vehicle title & registration and license plates.  Parking on Northwestern’s Campus Permits are required for all Evanston campus lots from 8:00 am to 4:00pm Monday through Friday unless otherwise posted. Remember that you need a permit even during quarterly breaks. You can purchase a parking permit through Evanston Campus Parking Services.   For information about obtaining a permit on Northwestern's Chicago campus, visit the University Services Parking Office. Public Train/Bus Transportation
The Evanston/Chicago area offers both train and bus public transportation options. See the NU Off-Campus life page on Public Train/Bus Transportation for useful links and routes.
HomeResourcesHealth Insurance & Services
Health Insurance and ServicesHealth Insurance
All international students are required to purchase the Northwestern University Health Insurance Plan, and maintain coverage for the duration of their academic program. All J-1 Exchange Visitors and their J-2 dependents are required to have insurance coverage. Exchange Visitors paid by Northwestern are eligible for NU benefits. Exchange Visitors not paid by Northwestern must have Visiting Scholar Health Insurance. See links below for additional information.

Student health insurance
Visiting scholar health insurance
Health Insurance for International Exchange Students
Health Services on CampusNorthwestern provides medical and psychological services to students on campus.Medical ServicesThe Northwestern University Health Service offers full outpatient medical care to Northwestern students. There are branches on each campus:
Evanston Health Services
Chicago Health Services
Mental Health ServicesNorthwestern Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS) serves as the primary mental health service at Northwestern University with offices on both the Evanston and Chicago campuses.
To learn more about CAPS, watch their intro video in English or Mandarin!

HomeResourcesHealth Insurance & ServicesVisitor and Dependent Health Insurance
Visitor and Dependent Health InsuranceHealth Insurance Requirements
The Department of State regulations governing the J-1 Exchange Visitor Program require that all J-1 exchange visitors and their J-2 dependents have health insurance coverage that meets the following requirements.

Medical benefits of at least $100,000 per accident or illness;
Repatriation of remains in the amount of $25,000;
Expenses associated with the medical evacuation of the exchange visitor to his or her home country in the amount of $50,000;
A deductible not to exceed $500 per accident or illness.
It is your responsibility to monitor that you and your dependents have such insurance while living with you in the US; failure to comply with this regulation could result in the loss of your J-1 status.
Visiting Scholar Health Insurance Plan
Coverage that meets these requirements is offered through the Visiting Scholar Health Insurance Plan.


The University self-insures the Plan and the Office of Risk Management provides program and claims administration.
Visiting scholars/exchange visitors who are paid by Northwestern are eligible for NU benefits.
Find plan details and learn about enrollment on the Office of Risk Management website.

International and visiting scholars must participate in the plan unless evidence of comparable coverage is presented, and a waiver is filed and approved by the Office of Risk Management.
HomeResourcesAddress Updates
Address UpdatesRelated linksCAESAR - Add or Update Address Instructions
SEVP Portal Login
Create an SEVP Portal AccountTo maintain your immigration status as an F-1 or J-1 student, it is crucial to keep your address information accurate and up-to-date. Please follow the appropriate instructions below to update your U.S. address.
For newly arrived students:
Newly arrived F-1 and J-1 students are required to update their U.S. address in CAESAR within 10 days of arrival. OISS cannot activate a student’s immigration record in SEVIS until the current U.S. address has been updated in CAESAR.
Even if you are in a temporary living situation, you should enter that address in CEASAR within 10 days of arrival. You will be able to update your address in CEASAR every time you move as long as you are an enrolled student at Northwestern. Federal regulations require you to update your current U.S. address every time you move within 10 days of moving.
CAESAR syncs with the OISS Portal, and your updated address will be reflected in your student profile in the OISS Portal within 24 hours of you making the change in CAESAR. These changes must be made in CAESAR.
Newly arrived students are also advised to add or update their phone number and emergency contacts in CAESAR.
For currently enrolled students:
Currently enrolled F-1 and J-1 students need to update their U.S. address in CAESAR within 10 days of moving. Follow these step-by-step instructions.
CAESAR syncs with the OISS Portal, and your updated address will be reflected in your student profile in the OISS Portal within 24 hours of you making the change in CAESAR. These changes must be made in CAESAR.
For F-1 students on OPT and STEM OPT
For F-1 students on OPT and STEM OPT
F-1 students participating in OPT and STEM OPT Extension must update their address via the SEVP Portal in the User Profile section within 10 days of the address change per federal regulations. To do this you will need to log in to the SEVP Portal. Please note, only students with approved post-completion OPT or STEM OPT can create an SEVP Portal account.
By default, after accepting the attestation, the SEVP Portal opens to the Edit Profile page. The information on this page displays the data as it is captured in the student’s SEVIS record and includes four parts:
Read-only biographic information
Editable physical address (where you live)
Editable mailing address
Editable telephone number

 Watch this VIDEO to review exactly how to update your address and telephone number in the SEVP Portal.
Changes to Email Address
Students cannot change their email address in the SEVP Portal. If your email address changes, you must email your new email address to intoff@northwestern.edu. OISS staff can then enter it in SEVIS on your behalf. The new email address will be automatically sent to the SEVP Portal.
Then, the SEVP Portal will send the student an email to verify the updated email address. Students must click on the link in the email to complete the verification and have email address updated in their SEVP Portal User Profile.

HomeResourcesHousing
HousingUseful LinksHousing Options
Undergraduate Housing (new students)
Graduate Student Housing
Early Arrival Requests and Cost
 
Questions about housing should be directed to housing@northwestern.edu
On-Campus Options for Students
Information about Northwestern Housing for students is available on the Residential Services website. Undergraduate students are required to live in university housing for the first two years of their program.
Off-Campus Housing
The university provides various resources to assist members of the Northwestern community in finding housing. See Northwestern's Off-Campus Life webpage for useful information including resources on finding housing, subletting and finding roommates.
Standard Procedures
When applying for an apartment, a landlord may require an application fee and a credit check (which may require a Social Security number or ITIN), as well as proof of income. Also, when signing a lease, a landlord may require a deposit (usually equivalent to one month's rent) in addition to the first rent payment.
More Information on Housing

"Securing Housing Off-Campus" PowerPoint presentation
How to Find Housing Brochure
"Securing Housing Off-Campus" PowerPoint presentation
How to Find Housing Brochure

HomeResourcesSpouse & Family
Spouse and Family ResourcesInformation for spouses and dependents, including visa information, employment and studying restrictions, and resources for families.
You may also view a version of this page translated into:
한국어  简化字  簡化字Dependent VisasIf you are the spouse of an international student, visitor, or employee, you will enter with dependent status. Children under the age of 21 are considered dependents as well. Explore VisasUse these links to get started, learn about dependents working or studying, and file required documentation.
Visas for J-1 Dependents
Visas for H-1B Dependents
Guidelines for Filing I-539
Canadian & Mexican Nationals (TN)
Australian National (E-3) Employees
Visas for Student (F-1/J-1) Dependents
Understand Employment The various dependent visa categories have different restrictions on employment. Learn about visa restrictions and employment authorization, if applicable.



Spouse & Dependent Employment
J-2 Sample Employment Authorization Letter


Getting SettledAs you move to the Evanston area, you may need the following information to find housing and other necessities.
Health Insurance and Services
CCIS English Conversation Partners
Driver's License or State ID
Social Security

For Parents and Families
Find resources related to enrolling your child school or childcare, as well as opportunities to meet other international spouses and parents.
Parent Resources
HomeResourcesSpouse & FamilySpouse and Dependent Employment
Spouse and Dependent EmploymentDepending on his or her visa status, an international spouse of an international student, visitor, or employee may be able to seek employment.
Eligible for Employment
Spouses in the following visa categories may be employed after receiving the appropriate authorization.

J-2 dependents (spouses of J-1 students and exchange visitors) are eligible for full- or part-time employment. J-2 dependents must file form I-765 with USCIS and receive the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) card before beginning employment. For information on application instructions, please see: Apply for J-2 Dependent Employment.
E-3 dependents (spouses of E-3 employees) are eligible for full or part time employment with an Employment Authorization Document Card (EAD). E-3 dependents must complete the form I-765 for E-3 dependent employment authorization.
Ineligible for Employment
Spouses in the following visa categories may not be employed or engage in business under any circumstances.

F-2 dependents (spouses of F-1 students)
H-4 dependents (spouses of H-1B employees)
TD dependents (spouses of TN employees) 
Apply for J-2 Dependent EmploymentThe U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) may grant a J-2 dependent permission to accept employment in the United States.Application ProcessAfter entering the United States, you can request for employment authorization (by mail) with USCIS.
Collect the required application documents, listed below. Be sure to make photocopies of your entire application for your records.
Mail all of the required documents to the appropriate USCIS Service Center.  The address can be found in the I-765 Instructions. It is advisable to mail the application from a U.S. Post Office by “certified mail/return receipt requested."
Wait for authorization.  Do not accept employment until after you have received employment authorization from USCIS and have been issued an Employment Authorization Document (EAD). After USCIS has received the application, it may take three months or more to be approved.


Note: Authorized employment for individuals in J-2 status is limited to the dates documented by USCIS on the EAD and the end-date usually matches the expiration date on the DS-2019.Application Materials ChecklistInclude the following documents in your application.
Completed Form I-765 Note: Always download and use the most recent I-765 directly from www.uscis.gov. Using an outdated form will result in your application being returned or rejected
Check or money order payable to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in the amount listed for I-765 processing Note: If using a check for payment, name and address must be printed on the check. Temporary checks are not accepted.
Letter to USCIS explaining reason requesting employment authorization (View sample letter)
Copies of both J-1 and J-2 DS-2019s (Do not send the originals.)
Copy of J-2 visa stamp in passport
Copy of J-2's biographical page in passport
Copies of both J-1 and J-2's I-94 records (Do not send the originals)
Two U.S. passport-style photos, with your name and I-94 number printed on the back of each (Visit CVS or Walgreens to get new photos taken-- photos must be less than 6 months old)
Copy of Marriage Certificate Note: If the certificate is not in English, please provide a translation, either translated by yourself or by someone else. Include a statement to the effect that the person translating the document is fluent in both English and the language of the original certificate and that they certify that the translation is true and accurate.
Copies of any previously issued EAD cards (if re-applying for J-2 employment authorization)
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on I-765 and I-539 applications as a courtesy to NU scholars and dependents. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all I-765 and I-539 application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). These applications are personal applications for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at
its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your I-765 or I-539 application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, scholars and dependents are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeResourcesSpouse & FamilyParent Resources
Parent ResourcesRead instructions for registering children in area elementary and middle schools. For children under 3, the Childcare Network of Evanston offers early learning options.School and ChildcareArea Activities for Families and ChildrenSchool and ChildcareOpenCloseRead instructions for registering children in area elementary and middle schools. For children under 3, the Childcare Network of Evanston offers early learning options.

Office of Work/Life & Family Resources-- Childcare options
Lactation Rooms (breastfeeding support) on the Evanston & Chicago campuses
Childcare Network of Evanston
Registering Children in School
Children in the Evanston area can attend an elementary or middle school in School District 65. Read below for these school options. The Chicago Public Schools (CPS) website also provides instructions for registration in Chicago schools.
School Options
Students are assigned an attendance-area elementary or middle school based on their residence address. District 65's website provides maps that demarcates the areas for each school.
Birth Dates and Kindergarten/First Grade Registration

Children who are 5 years old on or before September 1 are eligible for kindergarten.
Based upon an assessment of the child’s readiness, a child will be allowed to attend first grade if he or she attended a non-public preschool, continued his or her education at that school through kindergarten, was taught in kindergarten by an appropriately certified teacher, and will be 6 years old on or before December 31st.
How to Register Your Child
Families new to the district and enrolling for the current school year may register from Monday through Friday 8:00am – 4:00 pm and during the summer from Monday through Thursday 8:00 am to 4:30 pm.
1. Create an online registration account and complete a registration form.
For your convenience, computers are available in the lobby of the JEH Education Center, and staff is available to provide assistance.
2. Finalize registration in person by bringing required documents.
Bring the following documents to JEH Education Center, 1500 McDaniel Avenue:

Original birth certificate (visa or passport can be used if birth certificate is unavailable.)
District 65 Student Fees Form
If transferring from another school in Illinois: Illinois State Board of Education Student Transfer Form
Copies of three current documents that show your name and address:
One of the following: signed lease and/or letter signed by your NU department attesting to your name, address, and dates of employment
Two of the following: gas bill, electric bill, water/sewer bill, phone bill, cable bill, vehicle registration, bank statement, credit card statement, paycheck stub, driver's license/state ID



3. Submit your child's physical exam and proof of up-to-date immunizations to Health Services.

This must be submitted prior to the first day of school.
The District 65's Health Requirements web page lists additional health requirements and forms for certain grade levels.

Questions?
If you have questions about the registration process either email parents@district65.net call 847-859-8065 or 847-859-8056 or visit https://www.district65.net/registration.Area Activities for Families and ChildrenOpenCloseUse the links below to access events, classes, and outings in Evanston, Chicago and nearby neighborhoods.
Kidwinks
Evanston Children's Theatre
Evanston Public Library Kids Calendar
Skokie Park District
Grosse Point Lighthouse
Chicago Children's Museum
Kohl Children's Museum
Lambs Farm
The American Toby Jug Museum
Wagner Farm
Shedd Aquarium
Dearborn Observatory
Chicago History Museum
Old Town School of Folk Music
Evanston Art Center
Creative Kids Corner
Kindermusik
The Pot Shop
HomeResourcesLanguage Resources
English Language ResourcesPractice your English with these apps!
Duolingo
Babbel
FluentU
Learning and studying in a new language can be challenging, especially when it comes to academic writing and communication. However, there are a multitude of English language resources available to assist you in improving your language skills, building confidence, and achieving academic success. Below you will find information on various language and communication resources available to the Northwestern’s international community.
English Conversation Practice
CCIS Conversation Partners & Group Meetings for Spouses
Volunteers from Northwestern's Community Council for International Students (CCIS) are available to practice English through one-on-one conversation sessions and group meetings. Learn more about CCIS.
Coffee Talk
Coffee Talk
"Coffee Talk" sessions are co-sponsored by CAPS (Counseling & Psychological Services) and OISS. Coffee Talk is a welcoming space where attendees can:  support each other in navigating academic stress, overcome homesickness; grow self-confidence and cultivate a sense of belonging on campus; practice english; and take a break from studies!  See the Winter 2024 Planit Purple Coffee Talk schedule for full details.
Spring 2024 Coffee Talk Meeting Dates: April 5, April 19, May 3, May 17, May 31, 2024
Time: 3:00 - 4:00 PM
In person location: OISS at 630 Dartmouth Place
Spring 2024 Coffee Talk Zoom link.

OISS will also advertise these sessions through our Facebook and Instagram pages as well as through the International Student Newsletter that you will begin to receive after arrival to Northwestern.
Something to Talk About 
NU's ELP (English Language Programs) offers a Language Table series, Something to Talk About, which offers a chance to meet other people for fun informal activities and casual conversation. These events are free and open to all members of the NU community. Each event highlights a specific aspect of U.S. English and/or American culture. See more information on Something to Talk About.
English Language Programs (ELP) at Northwestern
English Language Programs serves students and scholars of The Graduate School:  PhD students, MFA students, postdoctoral fellows, and students in a TGS master’s program. Other Northwestern affiliates, such as undergraduates, may attend certain services as availability allows. See more information at https://www.elp.northwestern.edu/index.html.
Additional Resources
Northwestern's ELP maintains a comprehensive list of English Learner Resources from Northwestern, the local community and online services that may be helpful.  View the most up-to-date list on the ELP English Learner Resources webpage.
HomeResourcesUnderstanding Immigration Documents
Understanding Immigration DocumentsU.S. VisaWhat is a visa?A visa, or visa stamp, is a physical stamp or sticker in your passport that is issued by a U.S. embassy or consulate outside of the U.S. It indicates that you are eligible to apply for entry to the U.S. in a specific immigration category such as F-1 or J-1 student. Please note that Canadian citizens are not required to have a U.S. visa, but are required to have all other documentation.To enter the U.S., all nonimmigrant international visitors (except Canadians) are required to have the proper visa stamp placed in their passports. “Nonimmigrant” means a person has no intention of staying in the U.S. permanently. Visas are obtained at a U.S. embassy or consulate abroad. Visas cannot be obtained within the U.S., since it is an "entry" document only.
Example F-1 student visa:
Example F-1 student visa:
See the U.S. Bureau of Consular Affairs website for more information about different U.S. visas.What is the difference between a Form I-20 and a student visa?The I-20 isNOT the same a the student visa. These are 2 separate documents. 
The I-20 is a document issued by a U.S. government-approved educational institution certifying that a student has been admitted to a full-time study program and has demonstrated sufficient financial resources to stay in the United States. The I-20 is officially titled the “Certificate of Eligibility” because the documents allows an individual to apply for an F-1 student visa at a U.S. embassy or consulate abroad. The visa is needed for entry to the United States. 
Are you a newly admitted international student?
Visit the Immigration Document Request page to learn how to request a Form I-20 needed to apply for an F-1 student visa.What is the purpose of a visa?A visa allows a nonimmigrant to travel to a U.S. port-of-entry (airport, for example) and present themselves to a U.S. Immigration Inspector. The Inspector will ask some questions about their intent for coming to the United States and check to make sure that the nonimmigrant has an appropriate visa. Once admitted, an I-94 Arrival/Departure Record will be created. This indicates which nonimmigrant status they have been admitted to and the amount of time they are allowed to stay.What if my visa expires while I am in the U.S.?A visa in your passport issued by a U.S. consulate does not determine how long you can remain in the United States; it is only an entry document. Therefore, you may stay in the U. S. beyond the expiration date of a visa as long as you are maintaining your F-1 or J-1 status and the immigration document (I-20 or DS-2019)
long as you are maintaining your F-1 or J-1 status and the immigration document (I-20 or DS-2019) remains valid.
For international travel and re-entry to the U.S., the immigration document, passport and visa must be valid and unexpired. If the visa is expired it will be necessary to apply for a new visa, through the same process as your initial visa application, at a U.S. embassy or consulate outside the U.S. For more information about international travel, visit the F-1 & J-1 Travel webpage.Understanding your Form I-20 for F-1 StudentsThe I-20 is an official immigration document issued by a U.S. government-approved educational institution certifying that a student has been admitted to a full-time study program and has demonstrated sufficient financial resources to stay in the United States. The I-20 is titled the “Certificate of Eligibility” because it allows an individual to apply for an F-1 student visa at a U.S. embassy or consulate abroad.How is an I-20 created?After a school completes the admissions process, it collects necessary financial support and identification documentation for
admissions process, it collects necessary financial support and identification documentation for admitted international students requesting F-1 status. See Immigration Document Request for additional information for newly admitted international students.
The student names and biographic information are entered into a U.S. government database called SEVIS (Student and Exchange Visitor Information System). SEVIS processes the information and produces an I-20. The school official (called the Designated School Official or DSO) processes and signs the I-20 and then sends it to the student. If a student needs to update or change information on their I-20, the DSO makes these requests through SEVIS to produce a new document.How is the I-20 used?Outside the U.S.After receiving an I-20 from a school, an international student must make an appointment to apply for an F-1 visa at a U.S. embassy or consulate (the visa is needed for entry into the United States in F-1 status). Students must present both the F-1 visa and the I-20 to a U.S. Customs and Border Protection officer upon arrival at the U.S. port-of-entry. *Note: Canadian students are not required to apply for a physical U.S. visa but will need their I-20 for travel purposes.
Inside the U.S.Once a student has arrived in the United States and passes through the border inspections process (either at an airport, seaport, or land border), the I-20 is used as identification and proof of legal and academic status. Typically, students must show their I-20 at the Social Security Office and the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). The I-20 is also shown to employers in the hiring process for employment. CPT or OPT information and/or authorization will be printed on page 2 of the I-20.I-20s: Electronic vs. PaperAs of October 12, 2021, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security began to allow I-20s to be signed and distributed electronically by Designated School Officials (DSOs). Northwestern University OISS Advisors are DSOs. When you receive an I-20 from OISS, whether for initial attendance or any subsequent I-20, it will be issued electronically and available for you to access and print from the “Documents” section of your student profile in the OISS Portal.
You must print out the I-20, sign it in ink in the student attestation section, and carry a physical copy when using it for travel or other official purposes. Always be sure to keep all old I-20s in your personal records, but you must carry the newest version for travel or other purposes.Understanding your I-20 Program of Study and the “Major 1” description and number 

 The "Program of Study" section on the Form I-20 includes important information regarding a student’s level of education (bachelors, master’s, doctorate or other) and the CIP code corresponding to the Northwestern major program of study. A six-digit code is assigned to each major at Northwestern University based on the Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) code as defined by the U.S. Department of Education. Sometimes, the CIP code description is different from the NU major name because the CIP code is used to categorize majors at universities across the entire United States.
For example, below you will see the Major 1 description and CIP code of “Digital Communication and Media/Multimedia” with CIP Code 09.0702. This code (09.0702) is assigned to multiple academic programs/majors at Northwestern, including Journalism, Integrated Marketing Communication, and Media, Technology & Society.
A full list of Northwestern program majors and corresponding CIP Code and CIP code descriptions as determined and formally approved by the appropriate academic department at Northwestern can be found at Northwestern Academic Programs and CIP Codes. Please note this list is organized first by education level (Bachelor's, Master's, Doctorate) and then by CIP Code, in numerical order within each education level. 
 Why do I have multiple I-20s?Your initial I-20 reflects your initial program information. As your academic situation changes, you may need to get an updated I-20. For example, new I-20s are issued to continuing students whenever there is a significant update to a student's record. This includes changes in biographical data, program dates, major or program of study, the addition of work authorization, etc. You may end up receiving multiple I-20s during your time as an F-1 student. You should keep copies of all I-20s in your personal records.
Changes requiring issuance of a new I-20 are typically prompted by student request via the OISS Portal.  Should I keep all copies of my I-20s?Yes. You may obtain several different versions of your I-20 while you are in the United States if there are changes to your program or other information. Keep all copies for future reference. Always use the most recently issued I-20 for travel, work, or other purposes. Check the Date Issued under the School Attestation section to verify you are using the most recently issued I-20. Please note: Northwestern University does not maintain copies of previously issued I-20s beyond the documents saved to the OISS Portal. We recommend you keep copies of all I-20s with your important personalDo I need my I-20 for travel abroad?When traveling abroad, students must take their I-20 with them. The I-20 is required to reapply for a visa (if needed) and for re-entering the United States. Before departure from the United States, students should verify that they
the United States. Before departure from the United States, students should verify that they have a valid travel endorsement on page 2 of their I-20 from an advisor at Northwestern OISS. For continuing students this signature is valid for 12 months for multiple visits outside the United States. In most cases, a travel endorsement can be done quickly and easily at OISS in person during regular office hours or via a request in the OISS Portal. However, students should plan ahead and get their travel endorsement several weeks before departing the United States to avoid the holiday rush and university office closures over holidays.
See the F-1 & J-1 Travel section of the OISS website for additional information.How can I find out if my academic program qualifies for the STEM OPT Extension? The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) maintains a complete list of fields that fall within the regulatory definition of “STEM field” that qualifies certain degrees to fulfill the STEM OPT extension requirement. This list is known as the STEM Designated Degree Program list.
The   Northwestern Academic Programs and CIP Codesalso identifies programs with a STEM eligible CIP code. Please note this list is organized first by education level (Bachelor's, Master's, Doctorate) and then by CIP Code, in numerical order within each education level. Understanding your DS-2019 for J-1 StudentsCheck the Department of State DS-2029 Frequently Asked Questions for answers to many questions you might have about the DS-2019.What is a Form DS-2019?The Form DS-2019 or "Certificate of Eligibility for Exchange Visitor Status (J-Nonimmigrant)" is the basic document used in the administration of the exchange visitor program.
This form permits a prospective exchange visitor to seek an interview at a U.S. embassy or consulate in order to obtain a J-1 visa to enter the United States.
The Form DS-2019 identifies the exchange visitor and their designated sponsor (Northwestern University) and provides a brief description of the exchange visitor’s program, including the start and end date, category of exchange, and an estimate of the full cost of the exchange program.
The J-1 status is often used for students who are in a specific educational exchange program such as Fulbright or Northwestern affiliated exchange partnerships.
Regular degree-seeking students are also eligible for the J-1 visa if a majority (51% or more) of their total financial funding comes from sources other than personal funds. Learn more about Types of Student Visas and the difference between F-1 & J-1 status.
Understanding your Form DS-2019 Subject/Field Code & Remarks Section 4 on the Form DS-2019 includes important information regarding a student’s exchange visitor category (bachelors, master’s, doctorate or non-degree) and the CIP code corresponding to the Northwestern major program of study.  A six-digit code is assigned to each major at Northwestern University based on the Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) code as defined by the U.S. Department of Education. Sometimes, the CIP code description is different from the NU major name because the CIP code is used to categorize majors at universities across the entire United States; however, the NU program/major name is indicated in the Subject/Field Code Remarks.
For example, below you will see the Subject/Field Code 45.0603, which is associated with the CIP description “Econometrics and Quantitative Economics”. This code (45.0603) is assigned to multiple academic programs/majors at Northwestern, including Accounting, Economics, and Finance.
A full list of Northwestern program majors and corresponding CIP Code and CIP code descriptions as determined and formally approved by the appropriate academic department at Northwestern can be found at Northwestern Academic Programs and CIP Codes. Please note this list is organized first by education level (Bachelor's, Master's, Doctorate) and then by CIP Code, in numerical order within each education level. How can I find out if my academic program qualifies for the Academic Training STEM Extension? The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) maintains a complete list of fields that fall within the regulatory definition of “STEM field” that qualifies certain degrees to fulfill the STEM extension requirement. This list is known as the STEM Designated Degree Program list.
The   Northwestern Academic Programs and CIP Codesalso identifies programs with a STEM eligible CIP code. Please note this list is organized first by education level (Bachelor's, Master's, Doctorate) and then by CIP Code, in numerical order within each education level. Disclaimer 
The NU academic program list with corresponding CIP codes is provided as a courtesy to Northwestern  international students. This list of programs is NOT inclusive of all academic programs at NU, only those for which we have historically issued immigration documents. Please note that the OISS does not determine or set CIP codes. If you have a question about the CIP code assigned to your program, please contact your academic department directly. OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating on this list.
HomeResourcesI-94 Record
I-94 RecordTravel in and out of the U.S. is recorded electronically by Customs and Border Protection (CBP) through the I-94 Arrival/Departure Record for all international non-immigrant visitors to the U.S. This important record lists your entry date, port of entry, and visa status in which you were admitted to the U.S. The I-94 record may be required as proof of status for F-1 or J-1 benefits applications, employment verification, and other official purposes.
When you travel through an air or seaport into the U.S., you may or may not  receive an entry stamp in your passport. Your admission information will be recorded in your electronic I-94 record. Students who come through a land border crossing will receive a paper I-94 card. If you receive a paper I-94 card, keep the card stapled in your passport at all times.
How do I access my electronic I-94 record when arriving by plane?After you arrive in the U.S. by air travel, you should download and save a copy of your electronic I-94 record from the Customs and Border Protection website. It’s important to check that your electronic travel record is accurate and accessible. Keep the I-94 record with your other immigration documents in your electronic files. New students will need to submit the “Most Recent I-94” to complete the OISS check-in upon arrival to Northwestern.
Below is a photo of the section you will need to select on the CBP I-94 website to request your most recent I-94:How do I obtain my I-94 Record if I arrive by land?Customs and Border Patrol does not issue an I-94 automatically when you enter the United States by land border. When you travel via airline, the cost of the I-94 is included in the ticket price. When traveling by land, it becomes the traveler's responsibility to request the I-94 be generated and to pay the fee (currently $6). 
To obtain a Form I-94 when entering the U.S. by land:
Go to https://i94.cbp.dhs.gov/I94/#/home
Click on "Apply for New I-94" in in the box titled "Visiting the U.S. & Arriving Via a Land Border or Selected Ferry"
Complete the required information and pay the I-94 application fee (via PayPal of credit/debit card)
Please note the I-94 you apply for in this manner is provisional. You will also need to:1.  Appear at a port of entry within seven days of completing this online application. If you do not appear within seven days or are not issued an I-94 for any reason, there are no refunds.2.  At the port of entry, submit your biometrics (if required) and complete an interview.3. Please bring the documents you entered into the application with you to the port of entry.4.  Be prepared to show evidence of your residence, employment and/or travel plans, if asked by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Officer.
Important Note:
We recommend you apply in advance (within 7 days) of your planned entry into the U.S. by land so that you can complete the above requirements at the time of your entry.What does D/S stand for?“D/S”, or “duration of status” will appear on the I-94 record for the “Admit Until Date” line. This means that the individual may remain in the United States as long as they are properly maintaining status and their I-20 (F-1) or DS-2019 (J-1) program end date has not passed. Students on F-1 OPT and J-1 Academic Training are also granted “D/S” because they are still on F-1 or J-1 status during those practical training periods.How can I correct a mistake on my I-94 record?Sometimes Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officers make errors in students’ electronic I-94 records. Some errors, especially those regarding visa type or date of expiration, can impact your immigration status.
How to request a correction to  your I-94 record if there is a mistake:
If your U.S. Port of Entry was Chicago, send an email to i94chi@cbp.dhs.gov
If your U.S. Port of Entry was somewhere other than Chicago, refer to this CBP Site to find the correct email address for your U.S Port of Entry. You must contact the site where you where you entered the U.S.
Subject line: I-94 correction request
Body of message: be sure to include your full name (as listed in your passport) and a clear explanation of the error including date of arrival to U.S. and city/airport of arrival. 
Attach images of the following: 1)  United States F-1/J-1 visa page from your passport2)  Passport bio/photo page3)  Copy of flight itinerary with the airline and flight number for the entry to the U.S. with the error

Please allow 10 business days for this issue to be resolved. If it remains unresolved after 10 days, please contact your OISS advisor for further guidance.I-94 Website: Travel Records for U.S. Visitors
HomeResourcesInviting Family on B-1/B-2 Visa
ResourcesLetter of Invitation Template (B-1/B2 Visa)
B-1/B-2 Visitor Visa - U.S. Dept of State Overview & InstructionsB-1/B-2 Visitor Visas
For family members who are not the children or spouse of an F-1/J-1 visa holder, a B-1/B-2 visitor visa is required to visit the United States. However, citizens of certain countries may be eligible to visit the U.S. for up to 90 days without obtaining a B-1/B-2 visa through the U.S. Department of State Visa Waiver Program.
To obtain a B-1/B-2 visitor visa, it is recommended to work with a local travel agent in the home country. It is also recommended to reach out to the nearest U.S. embassy/consulate to verify the documents required to apply for a B-1/B-2 visitor visa.
Documents Needed to Apply for B-1/B-2 Visa
The following documents are required to apply for a B-1/B-2 visitor visa:

Valid passport
Photographs
Visa application fee
Visa application forms
Valid passport
Photographs
Visa application fee
Visa application forms

Additional Recommended Documents
To strengthen the B-1/B-2 visa application, additional documents could be provided to clarify that the visit is temporary and/or for a specific occasion (e.g., graduation ceremony), and that the visitor will be financially supported while visiting the U.S.
The additional documents should also demonstrate proof of ties to the home country, indicating that the visitor intends to return home after a temporary stay in the U.S.
Examples of proof of ties to the home country include:

Proof of employment – a letter from the employer indicating that the individual is currently employed and taking time off, but is due back at their job on a specific date.
Proof of property ownership – house, apartment, or business. •
Proof of contact with other family members in the home country.
Proof of finances – bank statement, stocks, property.
A letter of invitation written by the international student or exchange visitor could also benefit the visa application. This letter should indicate the specific reason for the visit (e.g., graduation) and include information about the purpose of travel and planned itinerary or schedule. It may include information about the U.S. immigration status of the international student or exchange visitor. See a template for this letter of invitation to accompany the B-1/B-2 visa application.
HomeResourcesVisa Renewal
Visa RenewalDo I need to renew my visa?
If you plan on traveling outside the United States or returning to your home country for a temporary visit, it’s important to ensure you will have the necessary visa documents to be able to return to the U.S. If your visa will expire before you return, you will need to allow enough time while you are outside the U.S. to renew your visa at a U.S. Embassy or Consulate. It's not possible to renew a visa while inside the U.S. Renewing a visa is similar to applying for the initial visa, as each application is considered independent.
It's important to note that a visa is only used for entry to the U.S. and the validity period of a visa does not determine how long an individual can stay in the U.S. An individual can stay in the U.S. past the expiration date of their visa as long as the immigration document (Form I-20 or DS-2019) has not expired and the electronic I-94 record reflects the proper status.
It is okay to remain in the U.S. after your F-1 or J-1 visa expires as long as:
Your passport is valid.
Your I-20 or DS-2019 is valid.
You are a continuing full-time student (or for students on post-completion OPT or Academic Training, you are following the OPT or Academic Training rules).

The F-1 or J-1 visa is only necessary for re-entry to the U.S. if you leave. After your visa expires, you must apply for a new F-1 or J-1 visa the next time you travel internationally in order to return to the U.S.
Visa Renewal Process
To apply for or renew a non-immigrant visa, you must do so outside the U.S. at a U.S. embassy or consulate. Here are some important things to keep in mind:
Renewal process
To initiate the visa renewal process, you must complete the DS-160 online visa application again. The U.S. Department of State has compiled a list of Frequently Asked Questions that may be helpful in completing the DS-160, including help for technical issues. You should also review the information on an Embassy's website to prepare for required documents at that particular embassy.


You do not have to pay the I-901 SEVIS Fee again if you are an F-1 or J-1 visa holder and have already paid the SEVIS fee before for the same SEVIS ID number.
U.S. Embassies and Consulates may waive the visa renewal interview requirement if you meet certain criteria. After you have completed the DS-160 form, you will be directed to either schedule an interview appointment or submit your application and documents to the Embassy or Consulate under the interview waiver program. However, even if you are waived from the interview requirement, you still need to be physically present in the same country as the U.S. Embassy or Consulate to submit your visa application. You cannot mail your application from within the U.S.

Processing times and administrative processing
Processing times and administrative processing

You may check the estimated visa processing time on the website of the specific U.S. embassy or consulate where you plan to apply for your visa. Wait times may vary considerably among consular posts, and processing times indicated may not be accurate.
Depending on your field of study and your country of citizenship, you could be put through a security check called administrative processing, which could delay your visa. Administrative processing can occur regardless of whether you have cleared administrative processing on a previous visa application. Please keep that in mind when planning a trip.
Third country application
Applying for a visa in a country which is not your home country or the U.S., called a "third" country, can be more difficult than applying in your home country. You may need to prove that you have continuously maintained lawful non-immigrant status during your time in the U.S. or you may be sent to your home country to apply for the visa. Refusal in a third country is more likely than at home, so you should plan well in advance of your date of travel.
Financial information and ties to home country
When applying for a non-immigrant visa, you must provide credible financial information and other required documents listed on the U.S. embassy or consulate website to prove your eligibility. You should also expect to answer questions about your intended length of stay in the U.S. and how you plan to apply the academic experience gained upon returning to your home country. Consular officials will seek evidence of your ties to your home country, such as family, property, employment, or bank accounts. If you don't provide sufficient evidence of your intent to return home, your non-immigrant visa application may be denied, and you'll need to submit a new application with stronger evidence of your ties to your home country. If you previously worked, studied, or lived in the U.S., you may be asked to show proof of maintaining legal immigration status.
If you are on F-1 post-completion OPT, STEM OPT, or J-1 Academic Training with a pending or approved H-1B petition, you must still demonstrate ties to your home country.
To return to the U.S. you will need:

Unexpired passport
Unexpired visa (except for Canadian citizens)
Unexpired immigration document (Form DS-2019 or I-20)
Valid travel signature on Form I-20 or DS-2019 - No older than 12 months for continuing F-1 or J-1 students - No older than 6 months if you are on F-1 post-completion OPT, STEM OPT, or J-1 AT - Submit a “Travel Signature Request” via the OISS Portal to obtain an updated travel signature
SEVIS Fee payment receipt

 You should check your documents prior to making international travel plans. It is also recommended that you take your visa documents for domestic travel outside the Chicago metropolitan area. It is possible that a government official may request to see them even if you are staying within the U.S. when you travel.
HomeResourcesUSCIS Premium Processing
USCIS Premium ProcessingThe following benefit requests are designated under the regulations for Premium Processing Service. Please be aware that you may only request premium processing for a benefit if USCIS has announced on its website that premium processing is available for that benefit. Your request for premium processing must also comply with any conditions that may apply. To determine if Premium Processing is available for your benefit request, visit the USCIS website at www.uscis.gov/I-907 or call the USCIS Contact Center at 1-800-375-5283. For TTY (deaf or hard of hearing) call: 1-800-767-1833.

Table of USCIS premium processing fees



Form 


Classification or Category Designated for Premium Processing


Fee


Processing Time





Form I-539, Application to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status
E-1, E-2, E-3, F-1, F-2, H-4, J-1, J-2, O-3
$1,965
Up to 30 days


Form I-765, Application for Employment Authorization
I-765 categories

$1,685
Form I-765, Application for Employment Authorization
I-765 categories

$1,685

Up to 30 days


Form I-129, Petition for Nonimmigrant Worker
E-1, E-2, E-3, H-1B, O, or TN
$2,805
Up to 15 days
More Information on USCIS Premium ProcessingWhen do I file a request for Premium Processing?You may file your request for Premium Processing Service with the applicable petition or application. You may also file the request for Premium Processing Service after you file the applicable petition or application, as long as USCIS has not made a final decision on the applicable petition or application.Paying Premium Processing FeesThe Premium Processing fee is in addition to all other applicable filing fees.
Form I-907 may not be filed by a beneficiary or co-applicant of the primary form for which premium processing is being requested.
You must pay for Premium Processing Service with a separate check or money order. (For example, one check or money order attached to the relating petition or application, and one check or money order attached to Form I-907).
Read full I-907 Premium Processing InstructionsCan I file a premium processing request online?Only certain F-1 students seeking OPT or STEM OPT extensions, or applicants requesting a change of status to F-1, F-2, J-1, or J-2 nonimmigrant status, may file Form I-907 online at this time. If you file a paper Form I-907, or any other USCIS form, you can create an online account to track the status of your case and sign up for case notifications.
To file Form I-907 online, you must first create a USCIS online account, which provides a convenient and secure method to submit forms, pay fees, and track the status of any pending USCIS immigration request throughout the adjudication process. There is no cost to set up a USCIS online account. If you have previously filed a USCIS form online, you may use your existing USCIS online account.OPT/STEM OPT Extension students – Special considerationsFiling for premium processing with the I-765, Application for Employment Authorization is optional. Prior to paying the premium processing fee, OISS recommends that you consider the following:
USCIS I-765 processing times 
The amount of time before your intended OPT employment start date 
Whether you need your EAD for travel purposes after your I-20 end date 

To check processing times for any type of OPT application, go to USCIS I-765 processing times and select: 

“I-765 Application for Employment Authorization” under “Form”, 
“Based on a request by a qualified F-1 academic student [(c)(3)]” under “Form Category”, and  
“Potomac Service Center” under “Field Office or Service Center” 
Related links
Form I-907
Form I-907 Instructions
USCIS Webpage: How Do I Request Premium Processing?
HomeResourcesNew Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals
New Employee Checklist for Foreign NationalsThis resource is intended for any foreign national newly employed by Northwestern University in the United States. A foreign national is a person who is not a citizen of the United States and is a citizen of a foreign country. Foreign Nationals who are newly hired by Northwestern University (and will receive a paycheck from Northwestern University) must complete these steps.Step 1: Activate Northwestern NetID and Email International Students (F-1 & J-1 sponsored by Northwestern)
Activate NetID
Create Northwestern student email account (G Suite). NetID activation & email account creation would have been completed prior to receiving access to the OISS portal to request a Form I-20 or DS-2019.
Set up Duo Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
Set up Display Name (nickname or preferred name) and preferred email and pronouns. See "Display Name and Pronouns" at Personal Information and Records on the HR website.Step 4 is optional.

Note:
F-1 & J-1 students whose immigration records are NOT sponsored by Northwestern University do NOT need to check in with OISS. Instead, you must check-in with your program sponsor and receive authorization before starting any work.Foreign National Employee
A Northwestern NetID and email address is automatically created for a new employee once the hire is processed by Human Resources. Learn more about employee NetID assignment on the HR website.
Employees sponsored by Northwestern University, need to Check-in with both OISS (see step #2) and hiring department. Most common sponsored employees are H-1B or J-1 visa holders.
Note:
Foreign nationals whose immigration record is not sponsored by Northwestern University do NOT need to check with OISS.Step 2: Complete virtual check-in with the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS)See the appropriate instructions below.International Students (F-1 & J-1 sponsored by Northwestern)Complete check-in via the OISS portal within 5 days of arrival. See Arrival Checklist for New Students for details.Foreign nationals employed by Northwestern but not sponsored by NorthwesternForeign nationals whose immigration record is not sponsored by Northwestern University do NOT need to check-in with OISS. Skip this step and proceed to step 3.J-1 ScholarsComplete check-in via email by emailing the following items to your assigned OISS Scholar Advisor

I-94 Record
JPEG or PDF of visa page in passport
Completed J-1 Scholar Check-in Form
H-1B EmployeesComplete check-in via email by emailing the following items to your assigned OISS Scholar Advisor:
I-94 Record
JPEG or PDF of visa page in passport
Image of admission stamp in passport (if given)
Step 3: Apply for a Social Security Number (SSN) or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN)Foreign nationals who already have a Social Security Card should skip this step and proceed to step #4.Only apply for an ITIN if you are NOT eligible for a Social Security Number. See the OISS Social Security resource to determine if you are eligible.
Read more about Social Security and Tax Identification Numbers on the HR website.
Applying for a Social Security Number (SSN) (processing takes 2-6 weeks)
See complete instructions and required documents at How to Apply for an SSN.
After you receive your Social Security Card:

If you have presented I-9 documents already, send an email to askHR@northwestern.edu  to request access to add your SSN to Section 1 of your I-9.
If you have not completed the I-9, start Section 1 of your I-9. See Step 4 below.
Who should apply for an ITIN?
Foreign Nationals who will receive stipends from a scholarship or fellowship, but will not be employed by Northwestern University, such as a graduate assistantship or temporary employment, will not be eligible for a SSN and must instead apply for an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). Students who receive an ITIN and later become eligible for a SSN should then apply for a SSN and cancel their ITIN.
ITIN applications are often completed with the Univeristy as part of the on-boarding FNIS process. See Step #5 below.Step 4: Complete Form I-9Form I-9 is used to verify the identity and employment authorization of individuals hired for employment in the United States. All U.S. employers must properly complete Form I-9 for each individual they hire for employment in the U.S. This includes citizens and noncitizens. Both employees and employers (or authorized representatives of the employer) must complete the form.
Complete section 1 of the I-9 no later than the first day of employment/paid status: https://northwestern.i9servicecenter.com/Login.aspx .
Create a UserID and Password under the New Employees section.
Present acceptable documents (passport, I-94, I-20, DS-2019, I-797, or EAD) to a Northwestern representative in your department or HR Operations no later than third day of employment/paid status.
Once SSN is received, contact askHR@northwestern.edu and ask for your I-9 to be opened.
Step 5: Register for Foreign National Information System (FNIS)
Complete the FNIS request form and submit to Payroll office or email to fntax@northwestern.edu
You will receive an email within 48 hours with UserID, password and additional instructions.
Complete data entry at https://fnis.thomsonreuters.com/northwestern/ on page 1-5 and submit on page 6. See the FNIS Tip Sheet for guidance on how to complete the electronic forms.
Submit your data electronically and your FNIS tax forms will be ready for signature within 48 hours.
Visit Payroll Office to sign your paperwork and present your documents. You will need to present the following: passport, visa, immigration documents (I-20, DS-2019, I-797 and/or IAD), and most recent  I-94 Record.

Northwestern University's Payroll Office is located at 1800 Sherman Ave, 1st floor, Evanston.Step 6: Set up direct deposit and confirm your address
Set up Direct Deposit to receive your paycheck electronically.
Login to MyHR with your NetID and password to review and confirm your legal/mailing address.
Step 7: Learn about U.S. taxes and your obligationsNorthwestern offers the following resources to assist you in understanding your U.S. tax obligations and filing a tax return.
OISS Resource on U.S. Taxes
Tax FAQs from OISS
Tax Information for Foreign Nationals - from Northwestern's Human Resources
 Questions?Any questions should be addressed to askHR@northwestern.edu.
HomeAbout OISS
Welcome! As part of Northwestern’s Roberta Buffett Institute for Global Affairs, the Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) advances globalization by supporting international students and scholars through orientation, immigration services, advocacy, and outreach. OISS is committed to providing culturally sensitive services of the highest quality. We strive to create an environment conducive to successful educational, personal, and professional experiences.
Whether you are a prospective student, an employee, a student already enrolled in an academic program, a visitor, a department contact, or a member of the greater-Northwestern community, we hope to provide you with information, services, and answers to your questions.Our RoleWe serve Northwestern's international student and scholar population. 7,000+International students and scholars at Northwestern
The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) maintains annual statistics and trends on Northwestern's international student, employee, and visitor population. These reports are a snapshot of the international community at Northwestern from the past several years, typically published in the Spring term.
More information on Northwestern's international community
OISS's mission and role
Our ServicesWho We AreFind contact information for our OISS department administrators and advisors, along with the specific audiences we serve.Our StaffWhere to Find UsView information about our office locations and hours.Our OfficeStay InformedOISS NewslettersRead the most recent international student & scholar newsletters from the OISS:
 OISS NewslettersProgramming & EventsFeb72024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...Feb92024Coffee Talk Winter 20243:00 PM International Student and Scholar Services, 630 Dartmouth PlaceAll NU students and scholars from both campuses are welcome to attend!
This is a community support space tailored for in...Feb142024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...
HomeAbout OISSOur Mission & Role
Our Mission & RoleThe OISS Mission
At Northwestern University's Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) within the Roberta Buffett Institute for Global Affairs, our mission is to create an inclusive environment that honors international students' and scholars' diverse experiences, cultures, and aspirations. We believe in the power of education to transform perspectives globally. We aim to equip our international community with the tools to navigate immigration compliance in the U.S. OISS plays a vital role in cultivating a dynamic, intercultural atmosphere on campus for international students, scholars, faculty, and staff through immigration sponsorship, ensuring seamless integration for those admitted, appointed, or hired by the university. 
Our Role
Issue timely U.S. immigration documents for smooth visa applications, travel, and change of status applications.
Provide accurate guidance on maintaining legal immigration status and offer orientation and outreach programs for students, faculty, scholars, and staff.
Serve as a resource to all departments across campus on U.S. visa and immigration sponsorship requirements.
Assist international individuals by referring them to relevant programming and workshops for successful transition and adjustment.
Support Northwestern’s globalization efforts by sponsoring non-U.S. citizens for U.S. visas and facilitating their integration within the community.
HomeAbout OISSInternational Community Statistics
International Community StatisticsOISS maintains information, including statistics and enrollment trends, about members of Northwestern international community who receive visa sponsorship through our office. This includes Northwestern's international student, employee and visitor population. Statistics Each year, OISS publishes statistics and enrollment trends about Northwestern's international community.
2022 Statistical Report (Released November 6, 2023) 
2021 Statistical Report (Released August 1, 2022)
2020 Statistical Report (Released March 18, 2021)
2019 Statistical Report (Released February 14, 2020)
2018 Student Statistical Report (Released February 13, 2019)
2018 Scholar Statistical Report (Released March 27, 2019)
2017 Statistical Report (Released December 18, 2017)
2016 Statistical Report (Released December 16, 2016)
2015 Statistical Report (Released December 12, 2015)
2014 Statistical Report (Released January 5, 2015)
2013 Statistical Report
2012 Statistical Report 
2011 Statistical Report
2010 Statistical Report
Economic Value of International StudentsThe economic contributions of international students are in addition to the immeasurable academic and cultural value these students bring to universities across the United States. View a state by state breakdown of the economic benefits of international students from the National Association for International Educators (NAFSA)

HomeAbout OISSContact Our Office
Contact Our OfficeOffice of International Student & Scholar ServicesStudent Services
Address: 630 Dartmouth Place, Evanston, IL 60208 Office hours: Monday through Friday, 12:00 PM - 4:00 PM, excluding holidays.
Web-in Wednesdays for virtual student advisement
Email: intoff@northwestern.edu – for general inquiries only, current students please contact your OISS advisor for specific questions (see below).
630 Dartmouth PlaceSee campus map
Scholar Services
Address: 1902 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208 Office hours: Monday through Friday, 12:00 PM - 4:00 PM, excluding holidays|
Web-in & Walk-in Wednesdays for virtual scholar advising services
1902 Sheridan OISS is open daily (M - F) , excluding public and University holidays, for document pick up/drop off. We can ship documents via FedEx, UPS, and DHL if that is preferred. To schedule an appointment with your advisor, please contact them via email. Advisor contact information can be found below and on the OISS Staff page.
1902 Sheridan Rd.See campus map
 OISS will be closed:
May 27, 2024 - Memorial Day holiday
Emergencies:
If an emergency arises outside of normal OISS business hours, please see the When the OISS is Closed resource for guidelines on what to do depending on the emergency.Contact your OISS AdvisorAdvisors will respond to email within five business days. We are closed on weekends and University holidays.
Visit the OISS Staff page to find your assigned advisor.
HomeAbout OISSContact Our OfficeWhen OISS is Closed
When OISS is ClosedContact Info NUPD: 847-491-3456
 Emergencies (or what you may think is an emergency) may arise outside of OISS office hours. Normal OISS staff hours are 8:30 - 5:00 PM excluding holidays when the University is closed. During normal office hours, please contact OISS directly. Please follow the guidelines below when OISS is not open.
Immigration Related Emergencies
Examples:

Trouble at the U.S. Port of Entry or stopped by a Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Officer
Immediate danger of deportation from the U.S.
Arrest

What to do:
What to do:

Call the Northwestern University Police Department (NUPD) at 1-847-491-3456.
Inform NUPD you are an international student or scholar and that you have an immigration related emergency. Briefly provide specifics to NUPD.
NUPD will contact the OISS Director or appropriate advisor to follow up with you. 
If possible, also send an email to intoff@northwestern.edu with details of your immigration related emergency.

Non-Immigration Related Emergency
Examples: 

Hospitalization
Personal injury
Automobile accident
Victim of a crime such as robbery or assault
Missing persons

What to do:

On-campus if NOT life-threatening: Call NUPD at 1-847-491-3456  and explain the situation
On-campus if life-threatening: Call 911 and explain the situation
Off campus: Call 911 and explain the situation
Once you are able, send email to intoff@northwestern.edu. OISS will provide assistance when the office reopens.
NON-Emergency, Immigration Related
If you are traveling without a valid travel signature:

Complete the Travel Signature request in the OISS Portal and you will be able to access and print the document from the OISS portal. Normal processing time is within 5 business days.
If you will be re-entering the U.S. in less than 5 business days, also send an email to INTOFF@northwestern.edu to explain your situation and urgency for an updated I-20/DS-2019 with a travel signature.

If your passport is lost or stolen while you are traveling outside the United States:
If your passport is lost or stolen while you are traveling outside the United States:

Contact your local embassy to apply for a replacement passport.
Note: some embassies require a police report in the case of a stolen passport.
If you will be returning to Northwestern University, you will need to re-apply for a new visa stamp in the new passport. See Apply for a Visa Stamp for further instruction.
You will not need to pay the I-901 SEVIS fee again. Go to the I-901 fee website and click on Check I-901 Status to print a copy of your I-901 payment confirmation receipt.
You will not need to request a new I-20 or DS-2019 UNLESS something has changed from your most recent immigration document (change of program, name change, travel signature expired, etc.).

All other inquiries (on-campus employment, off-campus work authorization, etc.)

Email your OISS advisor and they will respond after the office reopens within normal response time (3 business days or less).
HomeAbout OISSContact Our OfficeWeb-in Wednesdays
Web-in WednesdaysVirtual AdvisingOISS is pleased to offer virtual advisement for current international students and scholars on Wednesday afternoons. Please see the appropriate section below for instructions on how to connect virtually with your OISS advisor during Web-in Wednesday hours.Web-in Wednesdays for Students Web-in Wednesdays (12 - 4 PM) are a great way to connect with an OISS student advisor for a quick question via Zoom. Important points:
Web-in Wednesdays are offered for all current international students except for master's level or exchange students in the Kellogg School of Management.
Kellogg students should contact the Kellogg International Advising Team at international-advising@kellogg.northwestern.edu.
 If you have a complicated case or need more time, we'll refer you to your assigned advisor for a scheduled appointment.
Current hours for virtual advisement are 12:00 - 4:00 PM (CST) every Wednesday except university holidays or break periods. Note: Web-in-Wednesday is CANCELLED on December 27, 2023.
Students will be helped in the order of joining the virtual call.
Join OISS Student Web-In WednesdayWeb-in & Walk in Wednesdays for ScholarsVirtual and in-person advising is available to current international scholars on Wednesdays between 12:00 - 1:00 PM (CST) except university holidays and break periods. 
Note: Web-in-Wednesday is CANCELLED on December 27, 2023.
Web-in/Walk-in Wednesdays are offered for scholars sponsored on a J-1, H-1B, E-3, or TN visa. All advisors will be available in person at OISS at 1902 Sheridan Road and by their Zoom links as shown below. Find your assigned OISS Scholar Advisor on the OISS staff page.
Scholars joining by Zoom will be helped in the order they join the virtual call. 
Click on your assigned Scholar Advisor below to join connect via Zoom - Wednesdays, 12 - 1 PM (CST) 
Ariana Drule
Jenny Mok
Lydia Panton
HomeAbout OISSContact Our OfficeOISS Community Listserv
OISS Community ListservStay connected and informed with the Office of International Student and Scholar Services through our OISS-Community listserv for communications with the campus community. By subscribing, you'll receive OISS news and updates via email. Whether you're a campus partner, a currently enrolled international student, a visiting international scholar, or a student on OPT/STEM OPT, we encourage you to join our listserv to ensure you never miss important information from OISS. Subscribing is easy, and you have the freedom to unsubscribe at any time.
Instructions to sign up to receive the OISS-Community listserv:
1.    Log in to the email account you want to use to subscribe.2.    Compose a new PLAIN TEXT email.3.    Fill in the email as follows:



        To:        listserv@listserv.it.northwestern.edu        Subject:         Body:     SUBSCRIBE OISS-COMMUNITY FirstName LastName
* Please ensure the subject line is left blank.4.    Send Email.
If you have any questions or issue with subscribing, please contact OISS via email at intoff@northwestern.edu.
HomeAbout OISSOur Staff
Our StaffMeet the OISS advisors, leaders, and administrators on this page. International students and scholars can find their assigned advisor on the Student Advisors tab or Scholar Advisors tab.If you are an F-1 or J-1 international student, please find your advisor in the Student Advisors tab. Student advisors are assigned based on the first letter of your surname (family name) except for Kellogg master's level and exchange students.International scholars are international visitors and employees, including faculty members, staff, researchers, post-docs, exchange visitors and short-term visitors. Scholar advisors are assigned based on the host department/school at Northwestern.
OISS locations and hours
Visit the Contact our Office page for Student Services Office and Scholar Services Office locations, phone numbers, and current office hours. 
Web-in Wednesdays
Meet with an advisor virtually - no appointment needed
Web-in Wednesdays
Meet with an advisor virtually - no appointment needed
Go to the Web-in Wednesdays section for information on how and when you can connect with an OISS advisor for virtual advising services.Student AdvisorsScholar AdvisorsOISS Leadership & AdministrationStudent AdvisorsOpenCloseStephanie CisnerosAssistant Director for Kellogg School of Management 
F-1/J-1 students in Kellogg FT 1Y and 2Y MBA, MMM, MBAi, exchange and EMBA programs.
Email Stephanie
Schedule an appointment with StephanieRachel KreinAssociate Director
Student Advisor for: GLO and NU-Q exchange students
Email Rachel to schedule an appointmentYa "Haylee" ZhouInternational Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with:A, B, C, D, E, F, N, O
Email Haylee
Schedule an appointment with HayleeRyan RadebaughInternational Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with:G, H, I, J, K, T, U, V
Email Ryan
Schedule an appointment with RyanDanielle VogelSenior International Student Advisor
Email Ryan
Schedule an appointment with RyanDanielle VogelSenior International Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with: L & M
Email Danielle
Schedule an appointment with DanielleKyounghee LeeImmigration Compliance Specialist
Student Advisor for student surnames/family names beginning with: P & Q
Email Kyounghee
Schedule an appointment with KyoungheeQianying "Chainey" GaoCoordinator of International Student Experience
Student Advisor for student surnames/family names beginning with: R & S
Email Chainey
Schedule an appointment with ChaineySamantha SodetzInternational Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with:W, X, Y, Z
Email Samantha
Schedule an appointment with SamanthaRachel GiedrisSenior International Student Advisor for Kellogg School of Management 
F-1/J-1 students in Kellogg FT 1Y and 2Y MBA, MMM, MBAi, exchange and EMBA programs.
Email Rachel Giedris
Email Rachel Giedris
Schedule an appointment with RachelScholar AdvisorsOpenCloseCara Mitchell LawsonInterim Director & Assistant Director of Scholar Services
Employment/Scholar visas for Buffett Institute for Global Affairs & NU staff including NUIT, APS, Library & AthleticsLegal Permanent Residency
Email Cara
Schedule an appointment with CaraAriana DruleScholar Advisor
Employment/Scholar visas for Weinberg College of Arts & Sciences and McCormick School of Engineering
Email Ariana
Schedule an appointment with ArianaJennifer MokScholar Advisor
Employment/Scholar visas for Feinberg School of Medicine, Medill School of Journalism, School of Communication, and Office of Research Centers including ANSER, CBIE, CIERA, CLP, IIN, ISE, NAISE, NUANCE, Proteomics, Sleep and Circadian Biology, SQI, and Materials Research Center
Email Jennifer
Schedule an appointment with JenniferLydia PantonProject Manager
Email Jennifer
Schedule an appointment with JenniferLydia PantonProject Manager
Employment/Scholar visas for Pritzker School of Law, Feinberg School of Medicine, NU Qatar, and Bienen School of Music
Email Lydia
Schedule an appointment with LydiaOISS Leadership & AdministrationOpenCloseCara LawsonInterim Director
Email CaraRachel KreinAssociate Director
Email RachelMark ZajacSystems Analyst
Email MarkJeff CernucanProject Manager
Email JeffLydia PantonProject Manager
Email LydiaKyounghee LeeImmigration Compliance Specialist
Email KyoungheeJulie WojtalProgram Assistant
Email JulieLydia GunnProgram Assistant
Email LydiaSu Yeon YooProgram Assistant
Email Su Yeon
HomeAbout OISSProgramming & Events
Programming and EventsNorthwestern University and the Office of International Student & Scholar Services as well as the surrounding community offer a wide array of opportunities to get involved in the NU community and beyond. The OISS strives to enrich the academic, extra-curricular, and cultural experience of our international population by providing information and connections to the diverse range of available opportunities.
We encourage you to follow the OISS on  Facebook to stay informed of the latest events and news! You can also check the OISS Event Calendar. Community GroupCommunity Council for International Students (CCIS)  The CCIS is an all-volunteer group dedicated to making Northwestern University international students feel welcome in this country and at the University. They offer a variety of social and informational programs. Visit CCIS for more information on how conversation partners & groups, to involved.  For information about international student groups, please see our Student Organizations page.Get Involved at NorthwesternCoffee Talk - Evanston campus and virtualCoffee Talk is a welcoming space tailored for international students & scholars as well as those who have or are interested in international experiences. Attendees can:
Connect and interact with other international students on-campus over coffee, tea, snacks, and fun games. 
Support each other in navigating friendships, cross-cultural adjustment to academics and living in the US, overcome imposter syndrome, homesickness, relationships, career, stress and anxiety, and other relevant topics.
Grow self-confidence and cultivate a sense of belonging on campus. 
Celebrate the pride and resilience of international students.
And take a break from studies! 
See the Spring 2024 Planit Purple Coffee Talk Schedule for full details and Spring term dates.

The Coffee Talk program is co-sponsored by CAPS and OISS, and each meeting will be hybrid: In person at OISS or attend virtually via Zoom.
Where: In-person at 630 Dartmouth (OISS) or attend virtually via Zoom
Zoom link:Spring term 2024 - Use this recurring Zoom link for all spring term Coffee Talk meetings. 
Meeting times: Every other Friday at 3:00 - 4:00 PM
Dates: April 5, April 9, May 3, May 17, May 31, 2024
Facilitators: Jennifer Mazzetti, Psy.D. and Manisha Rustagi, Ph.D.
CAPS and OISS will provide tea, coffee, and snacks for all in-person attendees.
CAPS and OISS will provide tea, coffee, and snacks for all in-person attendees.
Coffee Talk "Fika Time" - Chicago campusCoffee Talk is a monthly gathering space for all international students. The gatherings will be hosted by CAPS staff to help facilitate meaningful conversations where one can share their experience as an international student and build community support. On the Chicago campus, Coffee Talk is also known as “Fika Time," which is a Swedish cultural practice where people take time from their busy day to socialize with others while enjoying coffee, tea and treats. There will be simple snacks to accompany our conversations in the spirit of fika!
 Coffee Talk “Fika Time” is a welcoming space where participants can:
Cultivate a sense of belonging and connection on Chicago campus; 
Share and connect around the study-aboard experiences and navigating cross-cultural adjustments in academics, career, relationships, etc.;
Gain new understanding and resources for emotional wellbeing and coping skills;
Celebrate the pride and resilience of international students;
And take a break from studying!
Time: Every first Friday of the Month, 3:00-4:00PM (please arrive on time)
Dates: February 2nd, March 1st, April 15th, and May 3rd 2024 
Location: Abbott Hall Room 332, TGS Conference Room - Chicago Campus  Facilitators: Angel Cheng, PhD and Chicago CAPS staff. For any questions or inquiry, please contact Dr. Cheng at angel.cheng@northwestern.edu.
To help CAPS plan for the event, to receive reminders and updates about Coffee Talk “Fika Time” for International Students, please RSVP here: https://forms.office.com/r/HGJ41wvy19Wildcat ConnectionWith more than 400 extracurricular clubs and organizations, Northwestern offers a huge range of amazing activities outside the classroom. Wildcat ConnectionNU NightsThis student-run organization hosts free alternative events for the Northwestern community. They provide both on and off-campus programming that usually runs from 8 to 11 PM (typically, but not always, on Fridays).NU NightsNorthwestern SportsAttend a "Big 10" sporting event and show your Wildcat spirit!NU SportsNorthwestern Fitness and RecreationNU students with a valid WildCARD have access to worldclass NU Recreation Facilities. The facilities offer a range of activities including swimming, basketball, squash, racquetball, tennis, group exercise classes, weightlifting, badminton and intramural and club sports, and much more. NU
group exercise classes, weightlifting, badminton and intramural and club sports, and much more. NU Recreation
HomeAbout OISSProgramming & EventsEvent Calendar
Event CalendarInternational Student OrientationInternational Student Orientation is held in September prior to the start of Fall Quarter. 
Learn MoreThe Office of International Student and Scholar Services offers events for international students, visitors, employees, and spouses and families. Find an upcoming event below.Apr32024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...Apr52024Coffee Talk Spring 20243:00 PMEvanstonAll NU students and scholars from the Evanston and Chicago campuses are welcome to attend!
This is a community support s...Apr92024Virtual Tax Workshop for International Students & Scholars 2:00 PMOnlineWas 2023 your first year in the United States? Have you been in the United States for more than 5 calendar years? Posses...Apr102024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...Apr172024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...Apr192024Coffee Talk Spring 20243:00 PMEvanstonAll NU students and scholars from the Evanston and Chicago campuses are welcome to attend!
This is a community support s...Apr242024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...May12024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...May32024Coffee Talk Spring 20243:00 PMEvanstonAll NU students and scholars from the Evanston and Chicago campuses are welcome to attend!
This is a community support s...May82024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...May152024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...May172024Coffee Talk Spring 20243:00 PMEvanstonAll NU students and scholars from the Evanston and Chicago campuses are welcome to attend!
This is a community support s...May222024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...May292024Web-in Wednesdays for International Students12:00 PMOnlineJoin OISS advisors on Zoom on Wednesdays from 12pm-4pm to ask an international student advisor quick questions. Please n...
HomeAbout OISSProgramming & EventsStudent Organizations
Student OrganizationsNorthwestern University has a large and diverse international student community. There are several student groups based on identity of affinity; associated with a country or region; language groups; and really anything you can imagine!  
Find your student organization or group at Wildcat Connection.  OISS-Sponsored GroupsThe Office of International Student & Scholar Services advises and sponsors three student groups.International Student Association (ISA) ISA is a student group for international undergraduates. ISA is a home away from home that strives to build a cohesive international community, and the group seeks to promote interaction among students from different cultural and religious backgrounds.   Join a committee, attend an event, make new friends and learn about other cultures!
Follow ISA on Instagram @northwestern_isa
Email ISA at isanu@u.northwestern.edu 
Graduate International Student Association (G-ISA) G-ISA aims to foster greater cross-cultural understanding by promoting interaction, providing information and ensuring inclusion for and by the graduate international community of Northwestern University.
G-ISA website: https://sites.northwestern.edu/gisa/ 
Follow G-ISA on Instagram @nu_gisa 
Like G-ISA on Facebook: @gisanorthwestern 
Email: gisa@u.northwestern.edu 
NU World Cup NU World Cup is the largest philanthropic and soccer organization with the largest student-run athletic tournament on campus. It is an organization seeking to bridge cultures and bring students from all backgrounds together to play the global game of football. Fundamentally, NU World Cup believes in the unifying power of sport to bring students together. Our vision is to create a campus where all members of the Northwestern community, regardless of background, experience the passion and energy of soccer.  

Follow NU Word Cup on Instagram @nuworldcup
Email NU World Cup at northwesternworldcup@gmail.com
HomeAbout OISSProgramming & EventsCommunity Council for International Students
Community Council for International StudentsGet InvolvedEach program  includes a contact who you can call or email if you're interested in participating as an international student or community volunteer. Please note that only local phone calls can be returned.
You can also contact CCIS President Mary Helen Albright.The Community Council for International Students (CCIS) is an all-volunteer group dedicated to making Northwestern University international students feel welcome in this country and at the University.
CCIS's Mission
Since 1971, CCIS has sought to “to provide a cross-cultural exchange of ideas, information, and friendship.” Thousands of students from throughout the world have found CCIS to be a wonderful resource for making their stay in the USA easier and more enjoyable. 
Programs 
Conversation Partners for Students
Programs 
Conversation Partners for Students
 A CCIS volunteer and a student practice and improve English skills by meeting regularly to discuss topics of shared interest. Partners will meet at a mutually agreed-upon location and time.
CCIS is seeking both fluent English speakers as volunteers and international students seeking language practice.
Apply online:
English speakers: Community Volunteers 
International Student or Scholar Participant

For more information about CCIS conversation partners:
Evanston contact: Doris Liberman, adlibs4612@gmail.com or by phone at 847-676-2932
Chicago contact: Lynne Carpenter, lynne.crpntr@gmail.com or by phone at 847-989-0897
Conversation Group for Spouses
Spouses meet in small informal groups for cultural exchange, to discuss American experiences, and to improve English skills. The group currently meets via Zoom. For more information, contact Mary Helen Albright by email at maryhelenchicago@gmail.com or by phone at 847-868-4979.
Host Family Program
Through the CCIS Host Family Program international students & scholars are paired with a local individual or family who will include you in activities throughout the year. Apply by downloading and completing an application:

Host Family Application
Host Family Application

For more information about the host family program, contact the appropriate person based on your location:Evanston contact: Greta Sims,  rgsims@att.net or by phone at 847-328-7394 Chicago contact: Lynne Carpenter, lynne.crpntr@gmail.com or by phone at 847-989-0897
Cooking Class
Students meet to cook and share lunch. The emphasis is on American-style home cooking, but participants are encouraged to help plan the curriculum. There is a small cost to help pay for the food.If you are interested in cooking classes, please contact Jeanne Reed by email at reedupuis@comcast.net or by phone at 847-251-7973.
HomeAbout OISSNewsletters
NewslettersStudent Newsletter March 13, 2024Student Newsletter March 1 2024Student Newsletter Feb 15 2024Student Newsletter Feb 1, 2024Student Newsletter Jan 12 2024Student Newsletter Dec 1 2023Student Newsletter November 15, 2023Student Newsletter October 31 2023Student Newsletter October 16 2023Student Newsletter October 2 2023Student Newsletter March 8 2023Student Newsletter Feb 8 2023Student Newsletter Sept 15 2023Student Newsletter Sept 1 2023Student Newsletter August 15 2023Student Newsletter June 12 2023Student  Newsletter May 15 2023Student Newsletter April 26 2023Student Newsletter April 5 2023Student Newsletter - March 27 2023Student Newsletter Feb 22 2023

HomeAbout OISSOur StaffbiosJulie Wojtal
Julie Wojtal
HomeAbout OISSOur StaffbiosJulie Wojtal
Julie Wojtal

HomeResourcesNew Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals
New Employee Checklist for Foreign NationalsThis resource is intended for any foreign national newly employed by Northwestern University in the United States. A foreign national is a person who is not a citizen of the United States and is a citizen of a foreign country. Foreign Nationals who are newly hired by Northwestern University (and will receive a paycheck from Northwestern University) must complete these steps.Step 1: Activate Northwestern NetID and Email International Students (F-1 & J-1 sponsored by Northwestern)
Activate NetID
Create Northwestern student email account (G Suite). NetID activation & email account creation would have been completed prior to receiving access to the OISS portal to request a Form I-20 or DS-2019.
Set up Duo Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
Set up Display Name (nickname or preferred name) and preferred email and pronouns. See "Display Name and Pronouns" at Personal Information and Records on the HR website.Step 4 is optional.

Note:
F-1 & J-1 students whose immigration records are NOT sponsored by Northwestern University do NOT need to check in with OISS. Instead, you must check-in with your program sponsor and receive authorization before starting any work.Foreign National Employee
A Northwestern NetID and email address is automatically created for a new employee once the hire is processed by Human Resources. Learn more about employee NetID assignment on the HR website.
Employees sponsored by Northwestern University, need to Check-in with both OISS (see step #2) and hiring department. Most common sponsored employees are H-1B or J-1 visa holders.
Note:
Foreign nationals whose immigration record is not sponsored by Northwestern University do NOT need to check with OISS.Step 2: Complete virtual check-in with the Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS)See the appropriate instructions below.International Students (F-1 & J-1 sponsored by Northwestern)Complete check-in via the OISS portal within 5 days of arrival. See Arrival Checklist for New Students for details.Foreign nationals employed by Northwestern but not sponsored by NorthwesternForeign nationals whose immigration record is not sponsored by Northwestern University do NOT need to check-in with OISS. Skip this step and proceed to step 3.J-1 ScholarsComplete check-in via email by emailing the following items to your assigned OISS Scholar Advisor

I-94 Record
JPEG or PDF of visa page in passport
Completed J-1 Scholar Check-in Form
H-1B EmployeesComplete check-in via email by emailing the following items to your assigned OISS Scholar Advisor:
I-94 Record
JPEG or PDF of visa page in passport
Image of admission stamp in passport (if given)
Step 3: Apply for a Social Security Number (SSN) or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN)Foreign nationals who already have a Social Security Card should skip this step and proceed to step #4.Only apply for an ITIN if you are NOT eligible for a Social Security Number. See the OISS Social Security resource to determine if you are eligible.
Read more about Social Security and Tax Identification Numbers on the HR website.
Applying for a Social Security Number (SSN) (processing takes 2-6 weeks)
See complete instructions and required documents at How to Apply for an SSN.
After you receive your Social Security Card:

If you have presented I-9 documents already, send an email to askHR@northwestern.edu  to request access to add your SSN to Section 1 of your I-9.
If you have not completed the I-9, start Section 1 of your I-9. See Step 4 below.
Who should apply for an ITIN?
Foreign Nationals who will receive stipends from a scholarship or fellowship, but will not be employed by Northwestern University, such as a graduate assistantship or temporary employment, will not be eligible for a SSN and must instead apply for an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). Students who receive an ITIN and later become eligible for a SSN should then apply for a SSN and cancel their ITIN.
ITIN applications are often completed with the Univeristy as part of the on-boarding FNIS process. See Step #5 below.Step 4: Complete Form I-9Form I-9 is used to verify the identity and employment authorization of individuals hired for employment in the United States. All U.S. employers must properly complete Form I-9 for each individual they hire for employment in the U.S. This includes citizens and noncitizens. Both employees and employers (or authorized representatives of the employer) must complete the form.
Complete section 1 of the I-9 no later than the first day of employment/paid status: https://northwestern.i9servicecenter.com/Login.aspx .
Create a UserID and Password under the New Employees section.
Present acceptable documents (passport, I-94, I-20, DS-2019, I-797, or EAD) to a Northwestern representative in your department or HR Operations no later than third day of employment/paid status.
Once SSN is received, contact askHR@northwestern.edu and ask for your I-9 to be opened.
Step 5: Register for Foreign National Information System (FNIS)
Complete the FNIS request form and submit to Payroll office or email to fntax@northwestern.edu
You will receive an email within 48 hours with UserID, password and additional instructions.
Complete data entry at https://fnis.thomsonreuters.com/northwestern/ on page 1-5 and submit on page 6. See the FNIS Tip Sheet for guidance on how to complete the electronic forms.
Submit your data electronically and your FNIS tax forms will be ready for signature within 48 hours.
Visit Payroll Office to sign your paperwork and present your documents. You will need to present the following: passport, visa, immigration documents (I-20, DS-2019, I-797 and/or IAD), and most recent  I-94 Record.

Northwestern University's Payroll Office is located at 1800 Sherman Ave, 1st floor, Evanston.Step 6: Set up direct deposit and confirm your address
Set up Direct Deposit to receive your paycheck electronically.
Login to MyHR with your NetID and password to review and confirm your legal/mailing address.
Step 7: Learn about U.S. taxes and your obligationsNorthwestern offers the following resources to assist you in understanding your U.S. tax obligations and filing a tax return.
OISS Resource on U.S. Taxes
Tax FAQs from OISS
Tax Information for Foreign Nationals - from Northwestern's Human Resources
 Questions?Any questions should be addressed to askHR@northwestern.edu.
HomeResourcesSpouse & Family배우자 및 가족을 위한 리소스
배우자 및 가족을 위한 리소스비자 정보, 고용 및 학업 제한 사항을 포함한 배우자와 부양가족을 위한 정보와 가족을 위한 리소스.동반 비자국제 학생, 방문객 또는 직원의 배우자인 경우, 동반 비자를 사용해서 입국하게 됩니다. 21세 미만인 경우에도 부양가족으로 간주됩니다.비자 알아보기이러한 링크를 사용하여 시작하고, 부양가족의 일 또는 학업에 대해 알아보고, 필요한 서류를 작성해 주십시오.

J-1 부양가족을 위한 비자
H-1B 부양가족을 위한 비자
I-539 제출 가이드라인
캐나다 및 멕시코 국민(TN)
호주 국적 취업(E-3)
학생(F-1/J-1) 부양가족 비자
취업 안내다양한 범주의 동반 비자는 취업과 관련된 여러 제약 조건이 있습니다. 비자 제약 조건과 취업 허가에 대해 알아보십시오(해당하는 경우).



배우자 및 가족
J-2 샘플 취업 허가서


정착하기에번스턴 지역으로 이주할 때 주택 정보와 기타 필수 사항을 확인하려면 다음 정보가 필요할 수 있습니다.
건강 보험 및 서비스
CCIS 영어 대화 파트너
운전면허증 또는 주 신분증
사회 보장 번호

부모와 가족용
자녀의 학교 또는 보육기관 등록에 필요한 리소스를 비롯하여 기타 국제 배우자와 부모를 만나볼 수 있는 방법을 찾아보십시오.
부모를 위한 리소스
부모와 가족용
자녀의 학교 또는 보육기관 등록에 필요한 리소스를 비롯하여 기타 국제 배우자와 부모를 만나볼 수 있는 방법을 찾아보십시오.
부모를 위한 리소스

HomeInternational ScholarsH-1B EmployeesVisas for Spouses and ChildrenGuidelines for Filing I-539
Guidelines for Filing I-539Documentation ChecklistPlease thoroughly read the Instructions for Completing Form I-539 and Instructions for Form I-539A on the USCIS website and make sure to include all necessary documents with the completed form I-539 and Form I-539A.
Copy of passport biographical page for all dependents
Printout of electronic I-94 for all dependents
Copy of visa stamp for all dependents
Copy of H-4/E-3/O-3 approval notice for all dependents
Marriage certificate (if applicable)
Birth certificate(s) (if applicable)
Form I-539A for each dependent other than the one listed on Form I-539 when filing for more than one dependent. If there is only one dependent, an I-539A is not needed.
Check for $370 payable to Department of Homeland Security
The I-539 Form needs to be completed for H-4, E-3, O-3 Dependents. Complete the forms using the following guidelines.
Part 1: Information About You
The information in this section is about the dependent spouse (or eldest child) requesting a change of status or extension (not the principle H-1B/E-3/O-1 beneficiary).
Use an address where you will be able to receive mail up to 6 months from filing the I-539.
Part 2: Application Type
Part 2: Application Type
Please check (2) request to extend current status or (3.a.) change of status to H-4/E-3/O-3 Dependent.
Part 3: Processing Information
For question 1: The current/requested status time should be the same end date of the principle H-1B/E-3/O-1.
For question 2: Check "Yes" if your family is currently in the U.S. in the same status. Check "No" if your spouse/parent will apply for or has a pending petition.
Part 4: Additional Information
The information here is about the dependent that is requesting the change/extension of status. Please answer all questions from dependents' perspective.
For Question 14:
If employed, please complete the relevant box on page 7. If you answer "Yes" to Question 14, be sure to include employer, annual salary and job title/brief description and a copy of the valid Employment Authorization Document (EAD) card.
If not employed, please complete the relevant box on page 7. If you answered "No" to Question 14, be sure to include H-1B/E-3/O-1's employer, annual salary and job title/brief description.
Part 5: Applicant's Statement Signature
This section must present an original signature by the dependent and not the principle H-1B/E-3/O-1 beneficiary.
Additional Dependents
If there are additional dependents (child/children), please complete form I-539A supplement. Please list each person separately and do not include the person already listed in Part 1 on the first page of the form.
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on I-765 and I-539 applications as a courtesy to NU scholars and dependents. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all I-765 and I-539 application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). These applications are personal applications for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at
its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your I-765 or I-539 application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, scholars and dependents are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeResourcesSpouse & Family配偶与家庭资源
配偶与家庭资源适用于配偶及家属的信息，包括签证信息、就业和学习限制以及适用于家庭的资源。家属签证如果您是国际学生、访客或雇员的配偶，则您将以家属身份入境。 21 岁以下的子女同样被视为受养家属。探索签证使用以下链接开始探索，了解陪工或陪读家属，并提交所需文件。

J-1 家属签证
H-1B 家属签证
I-539 表格填写指南
加拿大和墨西哥公民 (TN)
澳大利亚公民 (E-3) 雇员
学生 (F-1/J-1) 家属签证
了解就业不同的家属签证类别对于就业设有不同的限制。 了解签证限制和就业授权（如适用）。



配偶与家庭
J-2 就业授权书样本


定居在您搬到埃文斯顿 (Evanston) 地区后，您可能需要借助以下信息来寻找住房和其他必需品。
健康保险与服务
CCIS 英语会话合作伙伴
驾驶证或州身份证明
社会安全

针对家长及家庭
查找与子女入学或儿童托管相关的资源，以及结识其他国际人士配偶和家长的机会。
家长资源

HomeResourcesSpouse & Family配偶與家庭資源
配偶與家庭資源配偶與家眷資訊，包含簽證資訊、就業、學習限制以及家庭資源。依親簽證若您是國際學生、訪客或僱員的配偶，您將以依親身分入境。 未滿 21 歲子女可適用依親。探索簽證使用這些連結開始探索，了解依親陪工或陪讀，並提交所需的文件。

J-1 依親簽證
H-1B 依親簽證
提交 I-539 的參考指南
加拿大與墨西哥國民 (TN)
澳洲國民 (E-3) 僱員
學生 (F-1/J-1) 依親簽證
了解就業不同的依親簽證類別對於就業有不同的限制。 了解簽證限制與就業授權（如適用）。



配偶與家庭
J-2 就業授權書樣本


定居在您搬入埃文斯頓地區後，可能需要以下資訊來尋找住房及其他必需品。
健康保險與服務
CCIS 英語會話夥伴
駕駛執照或州身分證
社會安全

家長與家庭
尋找您孩子學校或託兒所就學的相關資源，以及認識其他國際配偶與家長的機會。
家長資源
HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for ArrivalStudent Health Requirements
Student Health RequirementsImmunization RequirementsNorthwestern students who are enrolled full time or half time in on-campus programs must meet University and State of Illinois immunization requirements no later than 30 days after their first term begins. Requirements differ based on program and the student's country of origin. Submission Steps
Identify your required immunizations and find your immunization form here.
Gather proof of your immunizations. Make sure the documents include your name.
 Visit https://www-healthy.nuhs.northwestern.edu/login_directory.aspx.
Enter your 7-digit student ID number
Select "Immunization Upload" from the list on the left to upload your proof of immunization and your completed program form.
Check your Northwestern email address for notification of any deficiencies and for confirmation that you’ve met the requirement.
Deadlines by term



Program Type and Term Start
Program Type and Term Start


Submission Deadline



Fall – Quarter, Semester, and Medical programs (MD, PT and Genetic Counseling)
July 1


Winter - Quarter
December 1


Spring - Quarter or Semester
March 15


Summer - Quarter or Semester
May 1


Transfer students/ off-cycle admits
30 days after acceptance
Penalties for non-complianceStudents who fail to submit their Student Immunization Form and record of immunizations, or fail to rectify ALL immunization deficiencies by 30 days after the start of classes will be barred from future class registration (including adding or changing classes) until compliant and will be assessed a non-refundable $100 late fee. PENALTIES ARE NOT ASSESSED PRIOR TO THE START OF CLASSES.Questions?If you have questions concerning the Student Immunization Form, immunization requirements, immunizations, or related issues, please review the Immunization Requirement Frequently Asked Questions. You can also email hims@northwestern.edu or call at 847-491-2117.Student Health InsuranceNorthwestern University requires all degree-seeking international students — students holding a J-1 or F-1 U.S. visa — to confirm their annual Northwestern University Student Health Insurance Plan (NU-SHIP) enrollment, and maintain coverage in the NU-SHIP, for the entire time they are
(NU-SHIP) enrollment, and maintain coverage in the NU-SHIP, for the entire time they are studying at Northwestern. Enrollment DetailsInternational students are encouraged to confirm their NU-SHIP enrollment as soon as possible in the open enrollment period — July 1 through Oct. 1 (for most students) — to ensure they have access to plan benefits and services as soon as the plan year begins on Sept. 1. Login to CAESAR to confirm your NU-SHIP enrollment. Please review the screenshot guide for assistance on how to confirm your enrollment.
Penalties for not fulfilling health requirements include a hold on subsequent registration and a non-refundable $100 late fee. 
The NU-SHIP premium will be billed to your student account following your tuition posting. Student Health Insurance ID CardDownload/print your Student Health Insurance ID Card: It typically takes five business days from when you confirm online in CAESAR or submit a manual enrollment form to the Student Insurance Office, for Aetna to generate your ID card. Please visit www.aetnastudenthealth.com/northwestern, and click on the “Get Your ID Card” to download a copy of your ID card. More informationVisit the NU-SHIP webpage for full details.
Student Health Insurance Documents and FAQs
2022-23 NU-SHIP Pamphlet
2022-23 NU-SHIP Plan Design & Benefits Summary
2022-23 NU-SHIP Summary of Benefits & Coverage
2023-24 NU SHIP Pamphlet
2023-24 NU-SHIP Plan Design & Benefits Summary
2023-24 NU-SHIP Summary of Benefits & Coverage

For more information, please visit the NU Student Health Insurance website or email questions to student.insurance@northwestern.edu.
HomeResourcesTravelPolicies and Procedures Impacting Re-Entry
Policies and Procedures Impacting Re-EntryFamiliarize yourself with policies and procedures that can impact your visa and the re-entry process.Visa Revocation PolicyAutomatic Visa RevalidationVisa Revocation PolicyOpenCloseU.S. Department of State may be revoking non-immigrant visas for individuals arrested for or convicted of driving while under the influence or driving while intoxicated in the previous five years. If the arrest/conviction occurred prior to the date of a recent visa application, then this policy may not apply if an application for a visa was assessed and a visa was issued. If a visa has been revoked as a result of this policy, an individuals may still obtain a new visa to come to the U.S. 
What does this mean for you?
What does this mean for you?
If you have had an arrest/conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or driving while intoxicated in the U.S., and if this arrest/conviction occurred after you obtained a visa to come to the U.S., it is possible that your visa has been revoked without you being aware of it.
Some individuals across the U.S. have been contacted by the visa post that issued their visa to inform them that their visa had been revoked.  Others have learned of the revocation of their visa when they attempted to return to the U.S. from a trip abroad.  If you had such an arrest/conviction, and if you plan to leave the U.S. intending to return, we suggest that you contact the visa post that issued your visa to inquire whether your visa is still valid. You should do so well in advance of your trip, e.g. before purchasing a plane ticket and when you still have time to make changes in your plans. We also recommend that you do not leave the U.S. until you have taken steps to address the matter. If the individual whose visa has been revoked has dependents in the U.S. in F-2, J-2 or H-4 status, the dependents’ visas will also be revoked. It is important to understand that this requirement does not affect your status in the U.S., only your visa. Remember that your visa is needed to
does not affect your status in the U.S., only your visa. Remember that your visa is needed to enter the U.S. but once you have entered, your visa does not have to remain valid. You must, however, have a valid I-20 (F-1/F-2), valid DS-2019 (J-1/J-2) or I-797 Approval Notice (H-1B/H-4). If you are not planning a trip abroad in the near future, this requirement does not affect you, even if you have been arrested/convicted, until you do seek to reenter the U.S. after a trip abroad. Please note that this information is not at all related to the recent election in the United States. Further, if you find that your visa has been revoked, or you are concerned, please consult with your regular OISS International Student or Scholar Advisor to discuss your options. The OISS can also refer you to legal representation should the need arise.Automatic Visa RevalidationOpenCloseYou are eligible for Automatic Visa Revalidation if:
you are an F-1/J-1 student or J-1 Exchange Visitor
your F/J visa stamp has expired
you plan to visit Canada, Mexico or an adjacent island (list of eligible islands) for less than 30 days                   

This means you can re-enter the US, even if your visa stamp has expired.  You will be allowed to re-enter the US one time (this DOES NOT renew or extend your visa stamp). 
Check with your OISS Advisor to review your specific situation. The following resources provide additional information:
Automatic Revalidation for Certain Temporary Visitors from U.S. Customs and Border Protection
Automatic Revalidation webpage from U.S. Department of State
Automatic Visa Revalidation is not very common, so the Customs & Border Patrol official or foreign border officer may not know what it is.  It is your responsibility to print the documents above, in case you need to explain the process to the officer.  Questions?  Please contact your OISS advisor.
HomeResourcesTravelPolicies and Procedures Impacting Re-Entry
Policies and Procedures Impacting Re-EntryFamiliarize yourself with policies and procedures that can impact your visa and the re-entry process.Visa Revocation PolicyAutomatic Visa RevalidationVisa Revocation PolicyOpenCloseU.S. Department of State may be revoking non-immigrant visas for individuals arrested for or convicted of driving while under the influence or driving while intoxicated in the previous five years. If the arrest/conviction occurred prior to the date of a recent visa application, then this policy may not apply if an application for a visa was assessed and a visa was issued. If a visa has been revoked as a result of this policy, an individuals may still obtain a new visa to come to the U.S. 
What does this mean for you?
What does this mean for you?
If you have had an arrest/conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or driving while intoxicated in the U.S., and if this arrest/conviction occurred after you obtained a visa to come to the U.S., it is possible that your visa has been revoked without you being aware of it.
Some individuals across the U.S. have been contacted by the visa post that issued their visa to inform them that their visa had been revoked.  Others have learned of the revocation of their visa when they attempted to return to the U.S. from a trip abroad.  If you had such an arrest/conviction, and if you plan to leave the U.S. intending to return, we suggest that you contact the visa post that issued your visa to inquire whether your visa is still valid. You should do so well in advance of your trip, e.g. before purchasing a plane ticket and when you still have time to make changes in your plans. We also recommend that you do not leave the U.S. until you have taken steps to address the matter. If the individual whose visa has been revoked has dependents in the U.S. in F-2, J-2 or H-4 status, the dependents’ visas will also be revoked. It is important to understand that this requirement does not affect your status in the U.S., only your visa. Remember that your visa is needed to
does not affect your status in the U.S., only your visa. Remember that your visa is needed to enter the U.S. but once you have entered, your visa does not have to remain valid. You must, however, have a valid I-20 (F-1/F-2), valid DS-2019 (J-1/J-2) or I-797 Approval Notice (H-1B/H-4). If you are not planning a trip abroad in the near future, this requirement does not affect you, even if you have been arrested/convicted, until you do seek to reenter the U.S. after a trip abroad. Please note that this information is not at all related to the recent election in the United States. Further, if you find that your visa has been revoked, or you are concerned, please consult with your regular OISS International Student or Scholar Advisor to discuss your options. The OISS can also refer you to legal representation should the need arise.Automatic Visa RevalidationOpenCloseYou are eligible for Automatic Visa Revalidation if:
you are an F-1/J-1 student or J-1 Exchange Visitor
your F/J visa stamp has expired
you plan to visit Canada, Mexico or an adjacent island (list of eligible islands) for less than 30 days                   

This means you can re-enter the US, even if your visa stamp has expired.  You will be allowed to re-enter the US one time (this DOES NOT renew or extend your visa stamp). 
Check with your OISS Advisor to review your specific situation. The following resources provide additional information:
Automatic Revalidation for Certain Temporary Visitors from U.S. Customs and Border Protection
Automatic Revalidation webpage from U.S. Department of State
Automatic Visa Revalidation is not very common, so the Customs & Border Patrol official or foreign border officer may not know what it is.  It is your responsibility to print the documents above, in case you need to explain the process to the officer.  Questions?  Please contact your OISS advisor.
HomeResourcesTaxesOISS Tax Resources
OISS Tax ResourcesOISS staff are not qualified or allowed to answer any tax-related questions or provide individual tax advice beyond the information provided on our website resources.
The tax information provided on the OISS website is intended only for international students and scholars with income sources and level typical of students and scholars at Northwestern University. Although the information  has been reviewed carefully and should be adequate to assist most international students and scholars, it is not a substitute for advice obtained from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or a qualified tax accountant. If your visa status has changed in the past year, or you believe you have a complicated tax issue, please consult the IRS or a qualified tax accountant.
In addition, while the tax preparation software for non-resident filers, Sprintax, is being provided to help you with your tax filing obligations, you are individually responsible for verifying that the correct information has been entered into the tax preparation software and included on all forms and/or other documents printed or derived from the tax preparation software, and ultimately responsible for any errors or omissions.
Below are some tax resources you may wish to utilize to find answers to your questions and for assistance in meeting your U.S. tax obligations.OISS access to Sprintax Tax Preparation Software for Non-Resident FilersBy the end of February, OISS will email all F-1 and J-1 students and scholars  instructions to access the tax preparation software Sprintax. This software will help you prepare your federal tax return free of charge. For an additional fee, Sprintax can assist you in preparing your state income tax return. Northwestern's Foreign National Tax TeamFor international students/scholars/employees receiving source income from Northwestern University (including wages and fellowship/scholarship funds).
OISS collaborates with the Foreign National Tax Team within the Office of Human Resources to ensure Northwestern international students and scholars employed by Northwestern or those receiving other source income in the form of scholarship/fellowship funds from NU are provided necessary information and comply with U.S. tax laws.
Learn More
View more information on Northwestern's Human Resources website at Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.




 Walk-in Hours
The Foreign National Tax Team offers both virtual and in-person walk-in hours.  See the current schedule.




Related Content
New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals


OISS Sponsored Tax Webinars with Young & Associates Tax & Accounting FirmSee dates and details.If you need to hire a tax professionalOISS recommends Alejandro Young of Young & Associates, LLC, an income tax and accounting services firm that specializes in all areas of US tax preparation, compliance, and problem resolution.Additional ResourcesInternal Revenue Service (IRS)
IRS Foreign Students, Scholars, Teachers, Researchers & Exchange Visitors resource
IRS Claiming Tax Treaty Benefits resource
Illinois Department of Revenue Tax Resources
Tax FAQs - OISS resource of frequently asked questions about taxes from international students and scholars
HomeResourcesTaxesOISS Tax Resources
OISS Tax ResourcesOISS staff are not qualified or allowed to answer any tax-related questions or provide individual tax advice beyond the information provided on our website resources.
The tax information provided on the OISS website is intended only for international students and scholars with income sources and level typical of students and scholars at Northwestern University. Although the information  has been reviewed carefully and should be adequate to assist most international students and scholars, it is not a substitute for advice obtained from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or a qualified tax accountant. If your visa status has changed in the past year, or you believe you have a complicated tax issue, please consult the IRS or a qualified tax accountant.
In addition, while the tax preparation software for non-resident filers, Sprintax, is being provided to help you with your tax filing obligations, you are individually responsible for verifying that the correct information has been entered into the tax preparation software and included on all forms and/or other documents printed or derived from the tax preparation software, and ultimately responsible for any errors or omissions.
Below are some tax resources you may wish to utilize to find answers to your questions and for assistance in meeting your U.S. tax obligations.OISS access to Sprintax Tax Preparation Software for Non-Resident FilersBy the end of February, OISS will email all F-1 and J-1 students and scholars  instructions to access the tax preparation software Sprintax. This software will help you prepare your federal tax return free of charge. For an additional fee, Sprintax can assist you in preparing your state income tax return. Northwestern's Foreign National Tax TeamFor international students/scholars/employees receiving source income from Northwestern University (including wages and fellowship/scholarship funds).
OISS collaborates with the Foreign National Tax Team within the Office of Human Resources to ensure Northwestern international students and scholars employed by Northwestern or those receiving other source income in the form of scholarship/fellowship funds from NU are provided necessary information and comply with U.S. tax laws.
Learn More
View more information on Northwestern's Human Resources website at Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.




 Walk-in Hours
The Foreign National Tax Team offers both virtual and in-person walk-in hours.  See the current schedule.




Related Content
New Employee Checklist for Foreign Nationals


OISS Sponsored Tax Webinars with Young & Associates Tax & Accounting FirmSee dates and details.If you need to hire a tax professionalOISS recommends Alejandro Young of Young & Associates, LLC, an income tax and accounting services firm that specializes in all areas of US tax preparation, compliance, and problem resolution.Additional ResourcesInternal Revenue Service (IRS)
IRS Foreign Students, Scholars, Teachers, Researchers & Exchange Visitors resource
IRS Claiming Tax Treaty Benefits resource
Illinois Department of Revenue Tax Resources
Tax FAQs - OISS resource of frequently asked questions about taxes from international students and scholars
HomeHost DepartmentsLPR SponsorshipLPR CategoriesOutstanding Professors & Researchers
Outstanding Professor or Researcher (EB-1B) - employer sponsoredProcessing TimesThe processing times for Immigrant Petitions, Applications for Adjustment of Status, and for processing through the U.S. consulates vary considerably, and there are a number of considerations that go into the decision as to which method to use.
Please contact LPR@northwestern.edu for further information.Individuals who can show that they are outstanding professors or researchers may be eligible to skip the labor certification process when applying for permanent residence. Individuals who qualify will be professors and researchers who are internationally recognized for their outstanding achievements.
Requirements for an Outstanding Professor or Researcher
The individual must:
Be internationally recognized as outstanding in a specific academic field.
Have a minimum of three years of experience in teaching and/or research in that field.
Enter the U.S. in a tenure or tenure-track teaching or comparable research position at a university or other institution of higher education, or in a comparable research position with a private employer that employs at least three full-time researchers and has documented accomplishments in the academic field within which the position is being offered.

In addition, evidence must be presented in at least two of the following areas:
In addition, evidence must be presented in at least two of the following areas:

Receipt of major prizes or awards for excellence in the field.
Membership in associations in the field that demand outstanding achievement of their members, as judged by recognized national or international experts.
Published material in professional journals written by others about the individual’s work.
Participation as a judge of the work of others in the same or an allied field.
Original scientific or scholarly research contributions to the field.
Authorship of scholarly books or articles in scholarly journals with international circulation in the field.
Presentation of evidence in two of the above categories does not guarantee approval of a petition as an Outstanding Professor or Researcher. The adjudicating officer will weigh the evidence that is presented to determine whether the evidence has fully established that the individual qualifies as an Outstanding Professor or Researcher.
Employer Requirements for an Outstanding Professor or Researcher
Employer Requirements for an Outstanding Professor or Researcher
Although a permanent labor certification is not required for the Outstanding Professor or Researcher classification, the petitioner must provide an offer of employment in the form of a letter from the prospective U.S. employer to the beneficiary, and the offer must state that the employer is offering the beneficiary employment in a tenured or tenure-track teaching position or a permanent research position in the beneficiary’s academic field.  In this context “permanent” means that the offer of employment intended to be of an indefinite or unlimited duration and that the nature of the position is such that the employee will ordinarily have an expectation of continued employment.
HomeHost DepartmentsLPR SponsorshipLPR CategoriesPERM Labor Certification 
Labor Certification with & without Special Handling (EB-2)The most common way for individuals to obtain U.S. permanent residence through employment involves a three step process, requiring an application for alien employment certification with the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), a petition for an immigrant worker with U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) and finally, a request for an Immigrant Visa, which can be filed through USCIS in the U.S. or through the U.S. Department of State.
Step 1: File a PERM Labor Certification Application
Step 1: File a PERM Labor Certification Application
In the PERM labor certification process, the DOL will make a determination whether it believes there is a shortage of U.S. workers who are qualified, willing, and able to perform the duties of the position for which the employer is seeking certification and whether the employment of the individual will have an adverse effect on the wages and working conditions of U.S. workers similarly employed.
table outlining the steps to apply for a PERM labor certification
Prevailing Wage Requirement


Under PERM, employers are required to pay 100% of the prevailing wage. Prior to the filing of the application, the employer must request a prevailing wage determination from the DOL. An employer can expect to receive a determination from the DOL within approximately six months. The employer is not required to wait until they receive the prevailing wage determination to begin the pre-filing recruitment described below. However, they must have a determination that is valid either when they begin recruitment, or when they file the PERM labor certification application with the DOL.




 
Pre-Filing Recruitment


All employers must perform certain pre-filing recruitment activities prior to the filing of a PERM labor certification application. At a minimum, the employer must do all of the following:
Place two print advertisements on two different Sundays in an appropriate newspaper.
Post a job opportunity notice at the employee’s worksite for a least ten consecutive business days.
Place a job order with the State Workforce Agency for a period of 30 days.
If the employer normally uses electronic or printed in-house media to recruit for similar positions, then they must also use this in-house media for the position for which certification is sought.

Positions that are listed as ‘professional’ positions in the preamble to the PERM regulation must undergo additional recruitment steps. For these positions, the employer must choose three of the following types of recruitment:
Job fairs
Posting on the employer’s website
Advertisement in a Job Search website other than the employer’s
On-campus recruiting
Job posting notice to trade or professional organizations
Private recruiters
An employee referral program, if it includes incentives for employees to find a match for the position
A notice of the job opening at a campus placement office, if the job requires a degree but no experience
Ads in local and ethnic newspapers, if appropriate for the job opportunity
Radio and television advertisements





Recruitment Report


Once the employer has completed the required recruitment, they must prepare a recruitment report that describes the recruitment steps taken and the results of that recruitment. This report must include the number of individuals hired and the number of U.S. workers rejected and must categorize the lawful job-related reasons for rejecting each applicant.




Filing the Application
Filing the Application


Once all of the necessary recruitment has been completed, and 30 days have passed since the last recruitment step has been performed, the employer may file the PERM labor certification application with the DOL. 




Special Rules for College & University Teachers
"Special Handling"
College and university teachers are entitled to ‘special handling’ of their PERM labor certification applications. Under this process, the college or university needs to document a ‘competitive recruitment and selection process’ for the position, which is an easier standard to meet than for other PERM labor certifications. With an application for university teachers, the school only needs to document that they hired who they felt was the most qualified applicant who was willing to take the job, and not that there are no U.S. workers minimally qualified to take the offered position.
As soon as the Labor Certification has been filed with the Department of Labor, the “priority date” for the applicant is established. This date determines when someone can complete step #3, i.e. the Adjustment of Status. (If no Labor Certification is required, the priority date is established with the filing of the Immigrant Petition/ Form I-140 below.)
Step 2: File the Immigrant Petition/Form I-140
Once the application for alien employment certification is approved or ‘certified’ by the DOL, the next step in obtaining U.S. permanent residence through employment is the filing of an Immigrant Petition for Alien Worker (Form I-140) by the employer with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
Current law allows for the concurrent filing of an Application for Adjustment of Status (I-485) together with the Form I-140, provided there is an immigrant visa number immediately available, which is determined by a monthly bulletin issued by the Department of State. In many circumstances, a visa number might not be immediately available, and the individual will need to wait until the I-140 is approved and a visa number becomes available before filing for Adjustment of Status in the U.S. In some circumstances, this waiting period can be many years. This is not always recommended. However, if the I-140 is denied, the I-485 will also be denied when filed concurrently.
Step 3: Filing an application for Adjustment of Status or Request for Immigrant Visa at U.S. Embassy or Consulate Abroad
The filing of an application for Adjustment of Status allows an individual who is in the U.S. in lawful status to remain in the U.S. for the entire time that the application is being processed. Additionally, when filing for Adjustment of Status, an individual may apply for employment and travel authorization for spouses and minor children. Alternatively, an individual can wait for the Immigrant Petition to be approved and an immigrant visa to become available and then request their permanent residence interview at the United States Consulate or Embassy in their home country. This option requires the individual to travel back to the country of citizenship to appear for an interview at the U.S. consulate to obtain approval of the immigrant visa.
HomeHost DepartmentsLPR SponsorshipLPR CategoriesNational Interest Waiver
National Interest Waiver PetitionsThis self-sponsoring category is specifically designed for professionals holding advanced degrees or individuals with exceptional ability in their field, who might be able to skip the first step of the LPR process, called labor certification, if their work is in the national interest. There are two types of National Interest Waiver petitions, one for physicians, and one for all other petitions. Individuals applying for a National Interest Waiver can either self-petition or be supported by an employer. 
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Service (USCIS) has put forth a three-part test that is used for non-physician occupations in evaluating an application for a waiver of the labor certification requirements based on whether an individual’s work is in the national interest.
Requirements for Obtaining a National Interest Waiver
Requirements for Obtaining a National Interest Waiver
The three-part test for judging an application for a National Interest Waiver is as follows:
The foreign national’s proposed endeavor has both substantial merit and national importance.
The foreign national is well positioned to advance the proposed endeavor.
On balance, it would be beneficial to the U.S. to waive the requirements of a job offer and thus of a labor certification.

The adjudicator needs to determine if the individual's significant contributions to their field warrant a national interest waiver. This means assessing if, despite the availability of a qualified U.S. worker, it would still benefit the nation to exempt the petitioner from the usual requirements of a job offer and labor certification. Essentially, the decision hinges on whether the individual's contributions are valuable enough to the U.S. to justify bypassing the standard labor certification process.
HomeInternational ScholarsAustralian National Employees (E-3)Apply for an Initial E3
Apply for an Initial E3The OISS only accepts E-3 requests from NU sponsoring departments, so any E-3 application should begin with the E-3 applicant speaking with his or her sponsoring department; once the department has confirmed its sponsorship, the Australian National (AN) can apply. See these host department steps.
Petitions can only be started 8 months prior to the employment start date. OISS processing times are subject to change based on processing volume.
Instructions for Incoming E-3 Beneficiaries
1. Submit required documentation to your host department.
Your host department must submit your forms and documents (listed below) along with its own documents as a complete package to the OISS.
Copy of passport biographical page
Current curriculum vitae (CV)
Copy of diploma(s)
Copy of transcript(s)
Credential evaluation Recommended evaluation companies include: Evaluation Service, Inc.; World Education Services (WES); Educational Credential Evaluators (ECE)

If you once held a J-1 visa and are subject to the 212(e) two-year residency requirement:

Copy of waiver recommendation
Copy of I-612

If you once held an E-3:

Copies of all past E-3 approval notices
If you once held an E-3:

Copies of all past E-3 approval notices

2. Complete the online questionnaire in Law Logix.
The Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) will send you necessary login information to Law Logix (ww8.welcomeclient.com) after your sponsoring department has submitted their request to the OISS.
3. Make a visa appointment at a U.S. Consulate/Embassy to obtain your E-3 visa.
After processing, you will be sent required documentation for visa appointment.
You can obtain E-3 visas for your dependents at this time.
4. Arrival and check-in.
You are required to check-in at the Office of International Student and Scholar Services prior to starting work.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsVisa Compliance & RequirementsAdditional Requirements for J-1 Student Interns
Additional Requirements for J-1 Student InternsFunding
J-1 Exchange Visitors may receive a salary or stipend from various parties. They can present funding from Northwestern, the government, private organizations, or personal funds, but the funding must meet the current living expense requirements. 

This funding requirement is currently $2,470 per month (not including dependents).
J-1 student interns bringing dependents must show an additional $610 per month for each dependent (spouse or child) they will bring with them on a J-2 visa.
If NU will be paying the J-1 intern, the required amount per hour must meet or exceed $8.25/hour.

Internship Requirements
Length:

The internship must last for no more than 12 months and is full-time (at least 32 hours/week).

Duties and resources:
Duties and resources:

The internship duties must not duplicate the student intern's prior experience.
The internship must expose the student intern to American techniques, methodologies, and technology and expand upon his/her existing knowledge and skills.
The internship not displace full or part-time temporary or permanent American workers or serve to fill a labor need.
The internship exists solely to assist the student intern in achieving the objectives of the internship and does not involve more than 20% clerical work.
The internship provides sufficient resources, equipment and trained personnel available for the specified internship.

Intern Responsibilities
Intern Responsibilities

The intern must primarily be in the US to engage in the internship rather than employment or provide services to NU.
The intern must be in good academic standing and currently pursuing a degree outside the U.S.
The intern must maintain satisfactory advancement towards completion of his/her internship.
He or she will return to his/her home institution to complete the degree.
S/he cannot transfer to NU while pursuing the internship.

Supervisor Responsibilities
Intern placement/training:

The intern must be oriented with the department personnel, equipment, procedures, etc.
He or she must not be placed in an unskilled or casual labor position, in a position that requires or involves child care or elder care, a position in the field of aviation or in clinical positions or any other kind of work that involves patient care or contact, including therapy.

Evaluation:
Evaluation:

NU student intern supervisor must complete a required evaluation of the intern's performance at the conclusion of the internship and for internships lasting longer than 6 months, a mid-point evaluation as well.
The Supervisor Evaluation must be submitted to the International Office.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsVisa Compliance & RequirementsAdditional Requirements for J-1 Researchers & Professors
Additional Requirements for J-1 Researchers & ProfessorsJ-1 Exchange Scholars in the Researcher or Professor categories are subject to a mandatory 24-month bar, which specifies that at the end of the program, they cannot return to the U. S. in the J-1 Research Scholar or Professor category for 24 months.
This includes exchange visitors currently in the Research Scholar or Professor category, or who have been in the J-1 Research Scholar or Professor category in the past 24 months.
Start Date
The 24-month bar goes into effect when the J-1 program finishes and the SEVIS record goes inactive, regardless of whether he/she was in status for only a few months or for the full five year limit of the J-1 program.
Therefore, to take advantage of the full five-year maximum of the J-1 Research Scholar or Professor category, the exchange visitor could have an appointment of five continuous years to keep his or her SEVIS record active.
Re-Entry or Change of Status to Other Categories/Statuses
Scholars in the Researcher or Professor category are not banned from re-entering in other J-1 categories (such as the J-1 Short Term Scholar) or other nonimmigrant or immigrant visa statuses. The 24-month ban also does not prevent an individual from changing his/her status while in the United States.
HomeResourcesTravelEmployee Travel
Employee TravelEmployees may travel within the U.S. or abroad, but they must follow certain restrictions and carry valid identification and travel documents. These restrictions vary according to visa category. 
For beneficiaries currently in the US, please consult your OISS advisor regarding all plans to travel outside the US before the anticipated approval of your petition. Leaving the US while a change of status, extension, amendment, or change of employer petition is pending approval by USCIS may be considered abandonment of the petition or  result in additional visa processing delays and employment disruption. We can coordinate the submission of your petition to accommodate your travel plans with advanced notice.H-1B Visa-HoldersDocuments Required Travel Within the U.S.

Valid Passport
Copy of H-1B approval notice

Traveling Abroad
Valid Passport
Copy of H-1B approval notice

Traveling Abroad

Original H-1B approval notice;
Copy of the Labor Condition Application (LCA);
Valid passport (6 months into the future) with valid H-1B visa stamp;
Copy of your I-129 petition;
Updated employment verification letter from NU department stating that you are currently employed, dates of employment, salary, job title and brief description of job duties.

Dependents
When traveling, H-4 dependents should carry:

Copy of the H-1B Approval Notice;
Copy of the H-1B petition most recently submitted to USCIS;
Other relevant documents related to H-4 status (Approval Notice, H-4 visa stamp);
Valid passport.
Expired Visa StampsIf your H-1B visa stamp has expired, you must obtain a valid H-1B visa stamp to re-enter the U.S.
Exception: If you are traveling in Canada or Mexico and will stay for less than 30 days, you can re-enter the U.S. on an expired visa stamp. Longer visits will require a valid stamp to re-enter.Status ChangesIf you are changing or extending your H-1B visa, you will need to obtain an H-1B visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in H-1B visa status.
This includes H-1B beneficiaries with a change of status (COS) within the U.S. who are currently in H-1B status with an Approval Notice. If the visa stamp is from another visa category (e.g. F-1), then you will have to obtain an H-1B visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in H-1B visa status.
If you are an H-1B beneficiary traveling while an H-1B extension is pending and will be re-entering the U.S. close to the expiration date of your current H-1B,  you are encouraged to carry the documents listed above plus the extension Receipt Notice and copies of the extension petition while traveling.
If you are an H-1B beneficiary who is changing employers (COE) and traveling with a valid visa stamp from another employer, you are required to bring all of the documents listed above.
Border CrossingWhen crossing the U.S. border, be prepared to answer specific questions about your current H-1B petition. You may be asked about: the nature of your employment (i.e. NU department, job title); specific job duties (i.e. job description); exact work location; or salary.
Occasionally individuals are selected for secondary inspection. Reasons for this inspection might include:
Your travel documents are incomplete or you do not have the proper documents or visa
You appear to have previously violated your immigration status
You appear to have a criminal record that is of concern
You have been selected for a random inspection

If you are pulled into secondary inspection, please answer all questions directly, truthfully and to the best of your knowledge.E-3 Visa-HoldersDocuments RequiredTraveling abroad

Valid E-3 visa stamp
Valid passport

Although not required for travel, the following documents may support your E-3 status. They are on file in the OISS office and are available upon request.

Original E-3 approval notice (I-797A): If you received your E-3 visa stamp in Australia, you will not have this document
Original E-3 extension receipt notice (I-797C)
Copies of USCIS approval (COS/COE) petition
Copies of USCIS extension (EOS) petition
E-3 visa support letter
E-3 status letter
Please request these documents from your scholar advisor.Status ChangesStatus changes
If you are extending your E-3 visa, and you plan to travel while the extension is pending, you may be able to enter the U.S. close to/after the expiration of your current E-3.
However:

Please notify the OISS of your plans before departure.
Take your extension receipt notice (I-797C) and copies of the extension petition with you while traveling.
TN Visa-HoldersDocuments RequiredTraveling abroad

Canadian TN holders may travel and re-enter the U.S. as long as the period noted on the I-94 is valid.
Mexican TN holders must ensure that the TN visa stamp in their passport is valid for readmission.
Travel with all documents needed to prove TN status, as each entry is up to the discretion of the border officer.
Status changesIf you are extending your TN visa, traveling while the extension is pending with the USCIS may create complications.
Please notify the OISS of your plans before departure.
The OISS will then request that USCIS send the electronic approval notice to the nearest U.S. consulate/embassy (for Mexican TN-holders) or location of pre-flight inspection/border crossing (for Canadian TN-holders).
O-1 Visa-HoldersDocuments RequiredTravel within the U.S.

Valid passport
Copy of O-1 approval notice

Traveling abroad

Original O-1 approval notice;
Valid passport (6 months into the future) with valid O-1 visa stamp;
Copy of your I-129 petition;
Updated employment verification letter from NU department stating that you are currently employed, dates of employment, salary, job title and brief description of job duties.

 Travel for DependentsWhen traveling, O-3 dependents should carry:
Travel for DependentsWhen traveling, O-3 dependents should carry:

a copy of the O-1 Approval Notice
copy of the O-1 petition most recently submitted to USCIS
any other relevant documents related to O-3 status (Approval Notice, O-3 visa stamp)
a valid passport.
Expired Visa StampsIf your O-1 visa stamp has expired, you must obtain a valid O-1 visa stamp to re-enter the U.S.Status ChangesIf you are changing or extending your O-1 visa, you will need to obtain an O-1 visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in O-1 visa status.
This includes O-1 beneficiaries with a change of status (COS) within the U.S. who are currently in O-1 status with an Approval Notice. If the visa stamp is from another visa category (e.g. J-1), then you will have to obtain an O-1 visa stamp to re-enter the U.S. in O-1 visa status.
If you are an O-1 beneficiary traveling while an O-1 extension is pending and will be re-entering the U.S. close to the expiration date of your current O-1, you are encouraged to carry the documents listed above plus the extension Receipt Notice and copies of the extension petition with him/her while traveling.
If you are an O-1 beneficiary who is changing employers (COE) and traveling with a valid visa stamp from another employer, you are required to bring all of the documents listed above.
Border CrossingWhen crossing the U.S. border, be prepared to answer specific questions about your current O-1 petition. You may be asked about: the nature of your employment (i.e. NU department, job title); specific job duties (i.e. job description); exact work location; or salary.
Occasionally individuals are selected for secondary inspection for various reasons. If you are pulled into secondary inspection, please answer all questions directly, truthfully and to the best of your knowledge.Pending Status for Legal Permanent ResidentsPrior to any travelPlease consult with the immigration attorney who filed your petition. Depending on where you are in the process, travel could compromise your application.Travel Tips
Before traveling, make photocopies of ALL documents: passport, visa status approval notice, visa stamp, I-94 record. Leave a set of copies at home or with a friend and carry a copy with you separate from your originals. Lost or stolen documents are much easier to replace with photocopies!
If you have lost your passport, please visit the Department of State's website for instructions on what to do next and how to file for replacement documents.
Remember to print and save your I-94 record each time you return to the U.S.  Visit www.cbp.gov/I94 to print your I-94 record.
HomeHost DepartmentsTN Visas
TN VisasDependent and Extension Information
View Visa Information for Family/Dependents of TN employees
See the  TN Extension webpage for instructions for extending an existing TN.
Created under NAFTA and continuing under the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), this category facilitates the entry of qualified citizens from Canada and Mexico to temporarily engage in professional business activities.  Eligible employees can be admitted to the U.S. in TN status in increments of up to 3 years at a time.
They can come for the following purposes:

Working for a U.S. employer as a professional.
Working for a foreign employer (including even a non-Canadian or non-Mexican employer) to provide pre-arranged professional services to a U.S. employer.

Occupations listed in USMCA Chapter 16 Appendix 2 qualify for employment under USMCA and must meet the minimum qualification for each profession, as listed.
Eligibility
Must be a citizen of Canada or Mexico.
Must possess the qualification and necessary license as per the designated occupation.
Degree must have been earned from institutions located in Canada, Mexico or the U.S.; if not, a credential evaluation must be done for equivalency.
Employment must be temporary and cannot be used to bring tenure-line faculty.
Position must be NU benefits-eligible and paid.

Steps for Host Department
As part of the request to the OISS, the host department will draft an offer of employment to the prospective TN employee. Once approved by OISS, the TN employee will then present required documents to an immigration or consular official. View the Steps for incoming TN employees.
TN requests must be submitted to the OISS at minimum two weeks prior to the begin date for Canadian citizens and two months for citizens of Mexico.
See our TN Extension webpage for instructions for extending an existing TN.
1. Department collects all required documents.
Required Documents
TN Request Form
Biographical page of passport
NU appointment/position confirmation
Copies of diploma/transcripts demonstrating the professional level required for position
Updated CV
Credential Evaluation IF degree earned from institutions outside of US, Canada or Mexico
Invitation letter from the department containing the following information:

Evidence that the employment is listed as a designated occupation
Evidence of required educational qualifications and/or additional licenses or credentials
Description of duties
Reference to the temporary nature of the position
Dates of employment and salary
Sample Invitation Letter



2.  Department submits all required documents to OISS.
Complete requests should be emailed as one PDF to EVrequest@northwestern.edu

E-mail subject: "TN Request: LAST NAME, Start Date" (e.g. TN Request: WILDCAT, 04/01/2016)
File name: "TNReq_LAST NAME, First Name" (e.g. TNReq_WILDCAT, Willie)
3.  OISS approves TN request (or requests additional information).
4.  Department mails Invitation Letter to TN employee.
HomeAbout OISSOur Staff
Our StaffMeet the OISS advisors, leaders, and administrators on this page. International students and scholars can find their assigned advisor on the Student Advisors tab or Scholar Advisors tab.If you are an F-1 or J-1 international student, please find your advisor in the Student Advisors tab. Student advisors are assigned based on the first letter of your surname (family name) except for Kellogg master's level and exchange students.International scholars are international visitors and employees, including faculty members, staff, researchers, post-docs, exchange visitors and short-term visitors. Scholar advisors are assigned based on the host department/school at Northwestern.
OISS locations and hours
Visit the Contact our Office page for Student Services Office and Scholar Services Office locations, phone numbers, and current office hours. 
Web-in Wednesdays
Meet with an advisor virtually - no appointment needed
Web-in Wednesdays
Meet with an advisor virtually - no appointment needed
Go to the Web-in Wednesdays section for information on how and when you can connect with an OISS advisor for virtual advising services.Student AdvisorsScholar AdvisorsOISS Leadership & AdministrationStudent AdvisorsOpenCloseStephanie CisnerosAssistant Director for Kellogg School of Management 
F-1/J-1 students in Kellogg FT 1Y and 2Y MBA, MMM, MBAi, exchange and EMBA programs.
Email Stephanie
Schedule an appointment with StephanieRachel KreinAssociate Director
Student Advisor for: GLO and NU-Q exchange students
Email Rachel to schedule an appointmentYa "Haylee" ZhouInternational Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with:A, B, C, D, E, F, N, O
Email Haylee
Schedule an appointment with HayleeRyan RadebaughInternational Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with:G, H, I, J, K, T, U, V
Email Ryan
Schedule an appointment with RyanDanielle VogelSenior International Student Advisor
Email Ryan
Schedule an appointment with RyanDanielle VogelSenior International Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with: L & M
Email Danielle
Schedule an appointment with DanielleKyounghee LeeImmigration Compliance Specialist
Student Advisor for student surnames/family names beginning with: P & Q
Email Kyounghee
Schedule an appointment with KyoungheeQianying "Chainey" GaoCoordinator of International Student Experience
Student Advisor for student surnames/family names beginning with: R & S
Email Chainey
Schedule an appointment with ChaineySamantha SodetzInternational Student Advisor
Student surnames/family names beginning with:W, X, Y, Z
Email Samantha
Schedule an appointment with SamanthaRachel GiedrisSenior International Student Advisor for Kellogg School of Management 
F-1/J-1 students in Kellogg FT 1Y and 2Y MBA, MMM, MBAi, exchange and EMBA programs.
Email Rachel Giedris
Email Rachel Giedris
Schedule an appointment with RachelScholar AdvisorsOpenCloseCara Mitchell LawsonInterim Director & Assistant Director of Scholar Services
Employment/Scholar visas for Buffett Institute for Global Affairs & NU staff including NUIT, APS, Library & AthleticsLegal Permanent Residency
Email Cara
Schedule an appointment with CaraAriana DruleScholar Advisor
Employment/Scholar visas for Weinberg College of Arts & Sciences and McCormick School of Engineering
Email Ariana
Schedule an appointment with ArianaJennifer MokScholar Advisor
Employment/Scholar visas for Feinberg School of Medicine, Medill School of Journalism, School of Communication, and Office of Research Centers including ANSER, CBIE, CIERA, CLP, IIN, ISE, NAISE, NUANCE, Proteomics, Sleep and Circadian Biology, SQI, and Materials Research Center
Email Jennifer
Schedule an appointment with JenniferLydia PantonProject Manager
Email Jennifer
Schedule an appointment with JenniferLydia PantonProject Manager
Employment/Scholar visas for Pritzker School of Law, Feinberg School of Medicine, NU Qatar, and Bienen School of Music
Email Lydia
Schedule an appointment with LydiaOISS Leadership & AdministrationOpenCloseCara LawsonInterim Director
Email CaraRachel KreinAssociate Director
Email RachelMark ZajacSystems Analyst
Email MarkJeff CernucanProject Manager
Email JeffLydia PantonProject Manager
Email LydiaKyounghee LeeImmigration Compliance Specialist
Email KyoungheeJulie WojtalProgram Assistant
Email JulieLydia GunnProgram Assistant
Email LydiaSu Yeon YooProgram Assistant
Email Su Yeon
HomeHost DepartmentsH-1B VisasInitial H-1B
Initial H-1BRelated LinksH-1B Department Request Form
H-1B Itinerary Letter Example
H-1B Check Request Process
LCA Posting Notice
USCIS Premium ProcessingOverseas and Change of Status applicants will need to apply for an initial H-1B. The OISS only accepts H-1B requests from NU sponsoring departments, so any application should begin with the applicant speaking with his or her department, who will initiate the process with the OISS.
Instructions for incoming H-1B beneficiaries
Steps for Host Department
1. Collect required documents 
In addition to the packet of documents submitted by the applicant (listed above), the host department is responsible for the following items:

H-1B Department Request Form
Offer letter, including the H-1B's start/end dates, annual salary, and job title
H-1B Itinerary Letter (See example)
Official University position confirmation, which must cover dates of requested H-1B
For faculty: faculty appointment letter;
For staff positions: HR offer confirmation letter and HR job description;
For research staff: research staff appointment;
For postdoctoral fellowships: postdoctoral research appointment.



2. Scan and email the documents to OISS
Placing the H-1B Department Authorization Form at the beginning, complete requests should be emailed as one PDF to EVrequest@northwestern.edu

Email subject: "LAST NAME, Start Date" (e.g. WILDCAT, 04/01/2013)
File name: "H-1BReq_LAST NAME, First Name" (e.g. H-1BReq_WILDCAT, Willie)
The request will be forwarded to the appropriate advisor, who will be in contact with the department and/or the EV with any questions or missing paperwork.
3.  Checks sent to 1902 Sheridan Road, via inter campus mail.
 $460 and $500 processing fee checks must be paid by the department. If the department would like to use Premium Processing, the department must also pay a $2,805 USCIS Premium Processing fee.  All checks must be separate and all are paid to the Department of Homeland Security. See H-1B check request process for detailed instructions. We will not be able to submit the petition to USCIS without the checks. Please submit the check request to Accounts Payable at the time of submitting the H-1B request, so the submission process is not delayed.

4. OISS and department manage the Prevailing Wage Determination (PWD) and Labor Condition Application (LCA) requirements
The following steps are required:
The OISS obtains the PWD to ensure that the university's wage offer is adequate.
The OISS files an LCA with the U.S. Department of Labor.
The OISS emails the LCA notice to the host department, which posts it at a conspicuous place for 10 business days. See posting notice instructions. (OISS recommend that you request the processing fee checks from Accounts Payable at this time)
Within 7 days of filing, the LCA is approved; the OISS sends the certified LCA to the Department for signatures and return.

5. OISS prepares the H-1B petition for submission to USCIS

OISS reviews the paperwork and emails the Department and Beneficiary if any additional documents are necessary.
OISS files the application with USCIS and provides the Department and Beneficiary with a UPS tracking number.

6. Receive Receipt Notice and Approval by USCIS
6. Receive Receipt Notice and Approval by USCIS

OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the receipt of the Receipt Notice.
OISS emails Beneficiary, Department Contact, and Payroll confirming the decision made by USCIS. Once approved, the I-797 Approval Notice along with an entire copy of the petition can be retrieved from the OISS. 
If Beneficiary is outside of Evanston/Chicago area, the OISS will coordinate shipping the Approval Notice and supporting documents to the Beneficiary. The Approval Notice is required for international travel.

Note: Change of Status applicants must retrieve the Approval Notice and supporting documents from the OISS and present the original to University Payroll prior to starting employment in H-1B status.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsExtending or Transferring Status
Extending or Transferring StatusWhen a J-1 Exchange Visitor is reappointed to their current position (extension of program), transfers to another Northwestern department, or transfers to/from an outside institution, OISS must update their DS-2019 accordingly.
Jump to instructions for:

Extensions (reappointment within the same department) 
Internal Transfers (between NU departments) 
External Transfers (to/from an outside institution) 

Extensions
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 extension request for their J-1 Exchange Visitors. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. An extension request contains all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following exceptions:
English proficiency documentation is not required for extension requests.
Copies of all current and previous DS-2019s are required for extension requests.
Internal Transfers
When a J-1 Exchange Visitor moves to a different Northwestern department, the EV’s new host department initiates the DS-2019 request. J-1 EVs must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The new host department must coordinate with the previous host department to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Usually, an internal transfer is accompanied by an extension of the DS-2019. The new host department must submit a request for an extension. When submitting the request to evrequest@northwestern.edu, make a note in the email explaining that the EV is transferring to a new department so OISS can update the department information on the DS-2019 accordingly
External Transfers
External Transfers
For external transfer-in and transfer-out requests, J-1 Exchange Visitors must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The Northwestern host department must coordinate with the external program sponsor to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Transferring to Northwestern
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 transfer-in request for their J-1 EVs. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. A transfer-in request should contain all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following additions:
Complete and attach the J-1 Transfer-in form to the request.
Include all current and previous DS-2019s in the request.

OISS will coordinate with the external program sponsor to schedule the transfer. The DS-2019 is issued on or after the effective date of the transfer, which is the start date of the Northwestern appointment.
Transferring out of Northwestern
When a J-1 EV wishes to transfer to another institution, they must complete the J-1 Early Departure/Transfer Out form and submit to their assigned scholar advisor. OISS will coordinate with the external and current program sponsors to schedule the transfer.

HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsExtending or Transferring Status
Extending or Transferring StatusWhen a J-1 Exchange Visitor is reappointed to their current position (extension of program), transfers to another Northwestern department, or transfers to/from an outside institution, OISS must update their DS-2019 accordingly.
Jump to instructions for:
Extensions (reappointment within the same department) 
Internal Transfers (between NU departments) 
External Transfers (to/from an outside institution) 

Extensions
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 extension request for their J-1 Exchange Visitors. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. An extension request contains all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following exceptions:

English proficiency documentation is not required for extension requests.
Copies of all current and previous DS-2019s are required for extension requests.
Internal Transfers
When a J-1 Exchange Visitor moves to a different Northwestern department, the EV’s new host department initiates the DS-2019 request. J-1 EVs must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The new host department must coordinate with the previous host department to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Usually, an internal transfer is accompanied by an extension of the DS-2019. The new host department must submit a request for an extension. When submitting the request to evrequest@northwestern.edu, make a note in the email explaining that the EV is transferring to a new department so OISS can update the department information on the DS-2019 accordingly
External Transfers
External Transfers
For external transfer-in and transfer-out requests, J-1 Exchange Visitors must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The Northwestern host department must coordinate with the external program sponsor to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Transferring to Northwestern
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 transfer-in request for their J-1 EVs. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. A transfer-in request should contain all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following additions:
Complete and attach the J-1 Transfer-in form to the request.
Include all current and previous DS-2019s in the request.

OISS will coordinate with the external program sponsor to schedule the transfer. The DS-2019 is issued on or after the effective date of the transfer, which is the start date of the Northwestern appointment.
Transferring out of Northwestern
When a J-1 EV wishes to transfer to another institution, they must complete the J-1 Early Departure/Transfer Out form and submit to their assigned scholar advisor. OISS will coordinate with the external and current program sponsors to schedule the transfer.

HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsExtending or Transferring Status
Extending or Transferring StatusWhen a J-1 Exchange Visitor is reappointed to their current position (extension of program), transfers to another Northwestern department, or transfers to/from an outside institution, OISS must update their DS-2019 accordingly.
Jump to instructions for:
Extensions (reappointment within the same department) 
Internal Transfers (between NU departments) 
External Transfers (to/from an outside institution) 

Extensions
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 extension request for their J-1 Exchange Visitors. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. An extension request contains all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following exceptions:

English proficiency documentation is not required for extension requests.
Copies of all current and previous DS-2019s are required for extension requests.
Internal Transfers
When a J-1 Exchange Visitor moves to a different Northwestern department, the EV’s new host department initiates the DS-2019 request. J-1 EVs must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The new host department must coordinate with the previous host department to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Usually, an internal transfer is accompanied by an extension of the DS-2019. The new host department must submit a request for an extension. When submitting the request to evrequest@northwestern.edu, make a note in the email explaining that the EV is transferring to a new department so OISS can update the department information on the DS-2019 accordingly
External Transfers
External Transfers
For external transfer-in and transfer-out requests, J-1 Exchange Visitors must be continuously appointed to a paid or unpaid position to maintain status. The Northwestern host department must coordinate with the external program sponsor to ensure there is no gap between the end date of the previous appointment and the start date of the new appointment.
Transferring to Northwestern
Northwestern host departments initiate the DS-2019 transfer-in request for their J-1 EVs. The department must assemble the required documents and submit them according to the directions outlined for incoming J-1 exchange visitors. A transfer-in request should contain all documents required for an initial DS-2019 request with the following additions:
Complete and attach the J-1 Transfer-in form to the request.
Include all current and previous DS-2019s in the request.

OISS will coordinate with the external program sponsor to schedule the transfer. The DS-2019 is issued on or after the effective date of the transfer, which is the start date of the Northwestern appointment.
Transferring out of Northwestern
When a J-1 EV wishes to transfer to another institution, they must complete the J-1 Early Departure/Transfer Out form and submit to their assigned scholar advisor. OISS will coordinate with the external and current program sponsors to schedule the transfer.

HomeResourcesSpouse & FamilySpouse and Dependent Employment
Spouse and Dependent EmploymentDepending on his or her visa status, an international spouse of an international student, visitor, or employee may be able to seek employment.
Eligible for Employment
Spouses in the following visa categories may be employed after receiving the appropriate authorization.
J-2 dependents (spouses of J-1 students and exchange visitors) are eligible for full- or part-time employment. J-2 dependents must file form I-765 with USCIS and receive the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) card before beginning employment. For information on application instructions, please see: Apply for J-2 Dependent Employment.
E-3 dependents (spouses of E-3 employees) are eligible for full or part time employment with an Employment Authorization Document Card (EAD). E-3 dependents must complete the form I-765 for E-3 dependent employment authorization.

Ineligible for Employment
Spouses in the following visa categories may not be employed or engage in business under any circumstances.
F-2 dependents (spouses of F-1 students)
H-4 dependents (spouses of H-1B employees)
TD dependents (spouses of TN employees) 
Apply for J-2 Dependent EmploymentThe U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) may grant a J-2 dependent permission to accept employment in the United States.Application ProcessAfter entering the United States, you can request for employment authorization (by mail) with USCIS.
Collect the required application documents, listed below. Be sure to make photocopies of your entire application for your records.
Mail all of the required documents to the appropriate USCIS Service Center.  The address can be found in the I-765 Instructions. It is advisable to mail the application from a U.S. Post Office by “certified mail/return receipt requested."
Wait for authorization.  Do not accept employment until after you have received employment authorization from USCIS and have been issued an Employment Authorization Document (EAD). After USCIS has received the application, it may take three months or more to be approved.


Note: Authorized employment for individuals in J-2 status is limited to the dates documented by USCIS on the EAD and the end-date usually matches the expiration date on the DS-2019.Application Materials ChecklistInclude the following documents in your application.
Completed Form I-765 Note: Always download and use the most recent I-765 directly from www.uscis.gov. Using an outdated form will result in your application being returned or rejected
Check or money order payable to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in the amount listed for I-765 processing Note: If using a check for payment, name and address must be printed on the check. Temporary checks are not accepted.
Letter to USCIS explaining reason requesting employment authorization (View sample letter)
Copies of both J-1 and J-2 DS-2019s (Do not send the originals.)
Copy of J-2 visa stamp in passport
Copy of J-2's biographical page in passport
Copies of both J-1 and J-2's I-94 records (Do not send the originals)
Two U.S. passport-style photos, with your name and I-94 number printed on the back of each (Visit CVS or Walgreens to get new photos taken-- photos must be less than 6 months old)
Copy of Marriage Certificate Note: If the certificate is not in English, please provide a translation, either translated by yourself or by someone else. Include a statement to the effect that the person translating the document is fluent in both English and the language of the original certificate and that they certify that the translation is true and accurate.
Copies of any previously issued EAD cards (if re-applying for J-2 employment authorization)
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on I-765 and I-539 applications as a courtesy to NU scholars and dependents. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all I-765 and I-539 application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). These applications are personal applications for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at
its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your I-765 or I-539 application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, scholars and dependents are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsJ-1 Visa Types
J-1 Visa TypesThis page outlines the four J-1 visa categories Northwestern University is authorized to use. OISS will make the final decision on which category the J-1 Exchange Visitor receives by reviewing the information provided in the DS-2019 Request.Short-TermDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 6 monthsExamples of NU Position
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Specialized non-research, non-staff position
Purpose of Visit
Teach
Observe
Consult
Train staff
Demonstrate special skill(s)
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/ Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?Yes, unlimitedResearchDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Postdoctoral Fellow
Research Associate
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarProfessorDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Lecturer
Visiting Faculty
Visiting Scholar
Purpose of Visit
Teach (primary)
Observe
Consult
Research
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarStudent InternDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 12 monthsExamples of NU PositionInternPurpose of VisitParticipate in structured internship programPosition in Home CountryStudentReturn in category?Yes, in different internship program
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsJ-1 Visa Types
J-1 Visa TypesThis page outlines the four J-1 visa categories Northwestern University is authorized to use. OISS will make the final decision on which category the J-1 Exchange Visitor receives by reviewing the information provided in the DS-2019 Request.Short-TermDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 6 monthsExamples of NU Position
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Specialized non-research, non-staff position
Purpose of Visit
Teach
Observe
Consult
Train staff
Demonstrate special skill(s)
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/ Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?Yes, unlimitedResearchDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Postdoctoral Fellow
Research Associate
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarProfessorDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Lecturer
Visiting Faculty
Visiting Scholar
Purpose of Visit
Teach (primary)
Observe
Consult
Research
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarStudent InternDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 12 monthsExamples of NU PositionInternPurpose of VisitParticipate in structured internship programPosition in Home CountryStudentReturn in category?Yes, in different internship program
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsJ-1 Visa Types
J-1 Visa TypesThis page outlines the four J-1 visa categories Northwestern University is authorized to use. OISS will make the final decision on which category the J-1 Exchange Visitor receives by reviewing the information provided in the DS-2019 Request.Short-TermDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 6 monthsExamples of NU Position
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Specialized non-research, non-staff position
Purpose of Visit
Teach
Observe
Consult
Train staff
Demonstrate special skill(s)
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/ Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?Yes, unlimitedResearchDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Postdoctoral Fellow
Research Associate
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarProfessorDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Lecturer
Visiting Faculty
Visiting Scholar
Purpose of Visit
Teach (primary)
Observe
Consult
Research
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarStudent InternDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 12 monthsExamples of NU PositionInternPurpose of VisitParticipate in structured internship programPosition in Home CountryStudentReturn in category?Yes, in different internship program
HomeInternational ScholarsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsJ-1 Visa Types
J-1 Visa TypesThis page outlines the four J-1 visa categories Northwestern University is authorized to use. OISS will make the final decision on which category the J-1 Exchange Visitor receives by reviewing the information provided in the DS-2019 Request.Short-TermDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 6 monthsExamples of NU Position
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Specialized non-research, non-staff position
Purpose of Visit
Teach
Observe
Consult
Train staff
Demonstrate special skill(s)
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/ Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?Yes, unlimitedResearchDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Postdoctoral Fellow
Research Associate
Visiting Scholar
Visiting Pre-Doctoral Fellow
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Purpose of Visit
Research
Observe
Consult
Teach
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarProfessorDuration of U.S. Visit3 weeks - 5 yearsExamples of NU Position
Lecturer
Visiting Faculty
Visiting Scholar
Purpose of Visit
Teach (primary)
Observe
Consult
Research
Position in Home Country
Professor
Researcher
Post-doc or Pre-doc/Graduate Students
Similar credentials (Doctors, attorneys, etc.)
Return in category?No, 24 Month BarStudent InternDuration of U.S. Visit1 day - 12 monthsExamples of NU PositionInternPurpose of VisitParticipate in structured internship programPosition in Home CountryStudentReturn in category?Yes, in different internship program
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on OPT
While on OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to :
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Employment and Unemployment on OPTDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment. There are limits to what jobs count as employment and to the number of days you may remain unemployed.When can I start working?On the start date of your approved EAD card. You must physically have the EAD card to start working. If your OPT approval or EAD card is delayed or lost, contact your OISS advisor to discuss your work options.What counts as "employment" while I am on OPT?Employment must be:
a job that is directly related to the student’s major area of study; if the relationship between the job and a student's field of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship.
at least 20 hours per week; if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student’s 90 days of unemployment. Each job should be marked as "full-time" (at least 20 hours per week or more) or "part-time" (less than 20 hours per week).
paid or unpaid.

Students on OPT should keep all records of employment. You may be asked to provide employment records during future USCIS application processes. Per the SEVP OPT Guidance document, the types of employment allowed during post-completion OPT include (these DO NOT apply to the STEM Extension):




Paid employment

Students may work in a job related to their field of study 20 hours or more per week (if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student's 90 days of unemployment).
Multiple employers or gigs

Students may work for more than one employer, but all employment must be related to the student’s major area of study. If a student is working with gigs, students should maintain a list of all gigs, the dates and duration.



Work for hire commonly referred to as "1099 employment"

This is a type of employment where an individual performs a service based on a contractual relationship rather than an employment relationship. If requested by DHS, students must be prepared to provide evidence showing the duration of the contract periods and the name and address of the contracting company.



Work for yourself or self-employed business owner
Work for yourself or self-employed business owner

Students may start a business and be self-employed. In this situation, the student must work full-time ( 20 hours or more per week) and be able to provide proof that their work is related to their program of study at NU. The student must be able to prove that he or she has the proper business licenses and is actively engaged in a business related to the student’s degree program.



Employment through an agency

Students must be able to provide evidence showing they worked an average of over 20 hours or more per week while employed by the agency.



Unpaid employment

Students on post-completion OPT may work as volunteers or unpaid interns. The work must be 20 hours or more per week. These students must be able to provide evidence from the employer that the student worked 20 hours or more per week the period of employment.
Unemployment 90-day ruleDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment.
Students on post-completion OPT may have up to 90 days of unemployment. The 90 days start counting from your approved OPT/EAD start date (not the recommended start date nor the program end date on your I-20) and are cumulative.
If you accumulate 90 days or more of unemployment, you are in violation of your F-1 status. You are expected to leave the U.S., transfer to another school, or change your visa status before the 90th day. See Options after OPT Ends.
Students who are granted a 24-month STEM extension are given an additional 60 days of unemployment for a total of 150 days over their entire post-completion OPT and STEM OPT periods.
Approved vacation from a job does not count as "unemployment" if you are still considered an employee there.
To ensure that you do not exceed the 90 day unemployment limit while on OPT, it is necessary to secure a full-time job, which is defined by USCIS as working 20 hours or more per week. Any job that involves working 20 hours or less per week will be apply toward your 90-day unemployment limit.
How do I know if my job is related to my degree and why is this important?Federal regulations require that all employment that you engage in while on OPT be directly related to your major area of study.  As part of your OPT reporting requirements, you must provide a description demonstrating a logical connection between your regular job duties and your major area of study. Further information and sample descriptions are available on the SEVP Policy Guidance: Practical Training – Determining a Direct Relationship Between Employment and a Student’s Major Area of Study page.
If the relationship between the job and a student's major area of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship. OISS won't be able to advise you on specifically which jobs do/do not qualify as we are not experts in your field of study. If you need assistance determining the fit of a job offer, we recommend discussing this with your academic adviser, the relevant Northwestern Career Office, or others in your field.What documentation do I need to maintain during my OPT employment?It is recommended that students maintain evidence for each job:
the position held,
duration of the position (start date and end date)
the job title
contact information for the student’s supervisor or manager
description of the work

Students must always report employment changes within 10 days of any change.
While on OPT, you are required to use the SEVP Portal to keep your SEVIS record up-to-date and report certain information to maintain your F-1 status. To keep your SEVIS record updated, the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) will email you a link to create a SEVP Portal account on or close to your OPT start date. You be required to use the SEVP Portal to:
Report your employment information within 10 days of starting or stopping a job.
Report how your job relates to your major area of study with a few sentences.
Update your address within 10 days of moving.
Changing employers/ multiple employersStudents may have multiple jobs and change jobs as many times as they wish during OPT, provided that all employment is directly related to their major area of study and the work is 20 hours or more per week. No special permission is required to change employers. However, you must update your employer information in the SEVP Portal within 10 days of the change.Reporting Requirements & Other RulesImportant rules to remember while on OPT are:
You may only work from the start date of your EAD card to the end date of your EAD card.The EAD card reads:          Valid From:_________ (start date)Card Expires: __________(end date)
All employment must be related to your major area of study.
You must report all employment and address changes to the SEVP Portal within 10 days of any change.
You are limited to 90 days of unemployment during your OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.

Below you will find additional details on OPT reporting requirements and other guidelinesReport any changes in address, employer, name, or status in the U.S. within 10 daysOnce your OPT is approved and your start date has passed, SEVP will send you login information (via email)  to create a SEVP Portal account. If you do not receive this email within one week, contact your OISS advisor for help to gain access to the SEVP portal. Be sure to check your Northwestern Email (including your spam/junk folder!) for the SEVP portal account setup email.  
You must report any changes (in address, employer, name or status in the U.S.) within 10 days. All reporting must be done in the SEVP Portal. If you are unable to report changes in the SEVP Portal, the OISS Portal will allow you to report any changes in your employment or personal details by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
See the SEVP Portal resource for additional detailed information.What records do I need to keep while on OPT?It is your responsibility to keep records of your employment, paid or unpaid. You may be asked about these records in the future (for example, if you apply for an H-1B, Legal Permanent Residency or other U.S. immigration status). Examples of records to keep include offer letters, contracts, payroll records, all job start/end dates, employer names, employer addresses and number of hours per week worked.Additional guidance for OPT studentsTaking classes while on OPTWhile on OPT, your primary purpose is to maintain OPT by working.  Incidental study (classes for fun or professional development) are allowed as a supplement to your work as long as you continue to work full-time.
If you decide to return to school full-time, you will need to transfer your SEVIS Record to the new school. If returning to Northwestern University, you should submit the Change of Level request at the OISS Portal. 
Your OPT will end on the date of your SEVIS transfer and you will no longer have work authorization.Health insurance while on OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern, your NU-SHIP coverage can continue through the end of the current academic year (September-August) or you are eligible to end your coverage early. We strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT time period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage.
If you are employed full-time during OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.How do I login to the OISS Portal after I graduate and my NetID is deactivated?Upon completion of your degree, your NetID automatically expires and will be deactivated by the university within 148 days. As your NetID is used to access the OISS portal, this will cause you to lose access to your OISS portal account. To prevent this from occurring, you will need to transition to new login credentials.
The OISS will first need to convert your portal account user ID from your NetID to your email address.Once your account user ID has been converted, you will receive an email with subject line:"Northwestern Office of International Student & Scholar Services Portal Account Conversion & NewLogin Credentials"
The email will list your new user ID (your email address) and a temporary password.
The temporary password will be valid for 30 days. If you do not log in within 30 days of receiving the email, you must reset your password (see below).
Your username is your email address that is listed as your “User ID” in your “Portal Account Conversion and New Login Credentials” email. Your password is the “Temp Password” from the same email.
You will be prompted to create a new password. This new password will be used for all future logins to the OISS Portal.
If you did not login within 30 days or receiving the email with  your temporary password, please follow the directions in the OISS Portal Guide for Alumni whose NetIDs are deactivated (instructions can be found on page 4).
Logging in to OISS Portal after graduation & deactivation of your NetID
In order to access your OISS portal account using your new login credentials, you must click on the Log in with OISS Portal Account (rather than Login with NetID).

 Filing and paying U.S. TaxesWhile on OPT, you are subject to all applicable federal, state and local taxes and must file taxes. See more information on the OISS webpage about U.S. Taxes.Traveling while on OPTRemember that your status is still F-1 while on OPT. If you travel abroad while on OPT, you must have the following to re-enter the U.S.:
Valid EAD card. This means you may not be granted re-entry to the U.S. until your OPT is approved and you have your physical EAD card.  Please discuss your travel plans with your OISS advisor, especially if you plan to travel after graduation.
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old). Need a new travel signature?  Request an I-20 reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
Current passport
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
IMPORTANT NOTE: 
If you do not apply for OPT but travel outside of the U.S. after the end date listed on your I-20 during the 60-day grace-period, you will have negated your eligibility to re-enter the U.S to apply for OPT. Your only option is to file online and there are some risks. Discuss your options with your OISS advisor if this is your circumstance.OPT ResourcesApply for STEM OPT
SEVP Portal
SEVP Portal Login page
OISS Portal - Login Guide for Alumni
OISS Portal -  User Guide for AlumniExtensions of OPT24 Month STEM OPT ExtensionStudents who have received a U.S. Bachelor’s, Master’s, or Doctoral degree in a STEM field (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) may be eligible to apply for a 24 Month STEM Extension of post-completion OPT (for a total eligibility of up to 36 months of OPT). You must apply for the STEM Extension before the end date of your EAD card.
Learn more:Apply for STEM OPTCap-Gap extension for future H-1B employees"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Options after OPT EndsYou are allowed a 60-day grace period following your OPT end date to leave the United States, change your immigration status, transfer your F-1 record to a new school,l or begin a new program at NU. You may want to pursue these options before the end of your OPT. If you remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without transferring to a new school, beginning your new program, or having applied for a timely filed Change of Status, you may begin accruing days of Unlawful Presence, which has serious consequences depending on the length of the overstay. Read more about each of the options:60-day grace period to leave the United StatesIf your plan is to depart the United States after OPT, you must do so within your 60-day grace period. You must stop working by the end date (card expires date) on your EAD card.
If you are leaving the United States permanently before the end date on your EAD, you must report this via the "Early Departure Notification" in the OISS Portal so OISS can complete your SEVIS record and F status. Changing immigration statusDuring OPT
If you are approved for a change of visa status during your OPT, you must report this to the OISS by submitting a "Report Change of Status" request in the OISS Portal so we can update your SEVIS record.
After OPT
If you have a pending change of status after your OPT ends, check with the immigration legal counsel working on your change of status application to determine what options are available to you and if you may remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without a negative impact to your immigration status
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
If you have a pending or approved change of status to H-1B, you may be eligible for a Cap-Gap Extension I-20. Please consult with your OISS advisor to determine your eligibility for issuance of an I-20 reflecting this extension.Pursuing a new program of study in the U.S.During OPT
If you wish to start a new full-time academic program while on OPT, the remainder of the OPT must be forfeited before beginning classes with the new program.
If you are beginning a program of study at another U.S. school, you must request a "Transfer Out" in order to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school.
If you are beginning a new program of study at Northwestern University, you must submit a "Change of Level" request at the OISS Portal.

After OPT
If you are planning to go back to school after your OPT, you will need to submit either a "Transfer Out" request to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school or request a "Change of Level I-20" if returning to Northwestern University.  Both of these requests are submitted via the OISS Portal. The "Tranfer-Out" or "Change of Level" request must be completed before the end of the 60-day grace period following the OPT end date.
Students should keep in mind the following points when deciding on when to request a Transfer Out of their SEVIS record:
After the SEVIS transfer release date has passed, students may not continue working on OPT, even if the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) has not expired. The transfer release date, in effect, cancels the EAD.
The SEVIS transfer release date can be within the OPT period dates listed on the EAD or up to 60 days after the expiration date on the EAD.
Classes at the new school must begin within 5 months of the transfer release date or at the start of the next available term, whichever is earlier.
Students may request a transfer release date in the future and continue working on OPT until that date as long as the EAD has not expired, and the new program of study has not yet begun.
If the length of time between the OPT end date and the start date of classes at the new school will be more than five months, please meet with your OISS Advisor to discuss your options.
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on STEM OPT
While on STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP), requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT and STEM OPT. As an F-1 student on STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so that you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that STEM OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to:
Reporting requirements while on STEM OPT
International Travel while on STEM OPT
Practical matters while on STEM OPT (health insurance, taxes, etc.)
Ending STEM OPT and departing the U.S. or changing status
Reporting Requirements while on STEM OPT Overview of reporting requirements while on STEM OPTUpdate your STEM employment or student personal information within 10 days of the change via Northwestern’s OISS Portal for alumni. Compared to your 12-month OPT period, there are additional requirements while on STEM OPT. Details of these requirements are outlined below.
The following information must be reported in the SEVP Portal during the STEM OPT period of authorization within 10 days of any changes or reporting deadlines:

Your residential address
Your phone and email address
Your residential address
Your phone and email address

The following information needs to be reported in the OISS Portal for alumni. Students on STEM OPT must report employment changes in the OISS Portal for your advisor to verify the I-983 training plan information.

Report any changes in your employment information including job title, address changes, employment end dates in the OISS Portal using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal.

You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.
You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.


Material Changes to your I-983 using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Validation Reports every 6 months using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
12-Month Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Final Evaluation I-983 at the end of each employment using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
24-Month Final Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)


Email your OISS advisor to report the following changes:

Date of exiting the U.S. if you leave the U.S. and will no longer pursue employment on STEM OPT
If your visa status changes while on STEM OPT
STEM OPT Data Validation Report - Every 6 monthsWhile on STEM OPT Extension, you are required to submit data validation reports 6, 12, 18 and 24 months after the STEM OPT Extension start date.
Every six months you will need to submit a STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal to confirm that your record in SEVIS accurately reflects your current circumstances. All students on the STEM OPT Extension will receive email notifications when it is time for you to submit your STEM OPT validation report. In the STEM OPT Validation, students are required to confirm this information:

Legal name.
Residential or mailing address.
Employer name and address.
Status of current employment.
Submit the annual evaluation at the I-983 12-month validation period, and the final evaluation at the I-983 24-month validation period
STEM OPT Extension students must report any change in the above information, including any loss of employment, within 10 days of the change.
A note about email reminders from SEVP: 
SEVP Portal users will receive a reminder via email 30 days before any validation report is due.  The email reminder will be sent to the email address in your SEVP portal account.12-month annual evaluations
You must submit Form I-983 page 5 “Evaluation of Student Progress” each 12 months and/or any time you leave an employer. You submit this in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the STEM OPT Validation request. The top portion is for the first 12 months. The Final Evaluation (bottom portion) is for 24 months and every time you leave a position.
Your employer must review and sign the self-evaluation to attest to the accuracy.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Check your STEM start date and mark your calendar for each 12-month interval of your STEM Extension for your reporting deadlines. You will receive emails from SEVP reminding you of your validation and evaluation timelines as well.
Reporting material changes to an existing Form I-983Students on F-1 STEM OPT must report to their OISS Advisor any material changes to, or material deviations from, the student's formal training plan. These changes must be reported via an updated Form I-983 submitted in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
As outlined in the form I-983 overview, material changes or deviations from the original Form I-983 may include, but are not limited to:
Any change of the employer’s EIN.
Any reduction in student compensation that is not tied to a reduction in hours worked.
Any significant decrease in hours per week that a student engages in a STEM training opportunity.
Changes to the employer’s commitments or student’s learning objectives as documented on the Form I-983.
Reporting requirements when changing employersIf you change employers while on the STEM OPT Extension, the new employer must be enrolled in E-Verify before you can begin to work. 
You must report any new employer via the OISS Portal with a new I-983 within 10 days of starting work for your new STEM OPT employer by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
When leaving a job or employer, you must submit your final evaluation on your form I-983 (page 5) for that employer and report your employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request at the OISS Portal.While on STEM OPT, what information do I need to report via the SEVP Portal?F-1 students participating in STEM OPT need to update the following via the SEVP Portal:
Physical home address
Mailing address
Telephone number
Unemployment while on STEM OPT ExtensionWhile on the STEM OPT Extension, you receive an additional 60 days of unemployment time in addition to any of the 90 days you did not use during your Post-Completion OPT, for a total of 150 days maximum unemployment days during the entire 36 months of OPT (12 months standard post-completion OPT + 24 months STEM OPT).
Unemployment Caution: 
SEVIS records may automatically terminate if no employment has been reported for 150 days.International travel while on STEM OPTCan I travel overseas while on STEM OPT Extension?Yes. Remember that your status is still F-1. To re-enter the U.S., you must have:
Valid EAD card
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old) with current employer information listed on 2nd page of I-20.  Need a new I-20? Request a Reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp or plans to renew yours. Canadians are not required to have an F-1 visa stamp.
Current passport (valid for at least 6 months into the future unless your passport country belongs to the Six Month Club
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
You may travel overseas while your STEM Extension is pending, as long as you have your receipt notice, post-completion OPT EAD card, and all other required documents.
Can I travel overseas if my original 12-month EAD is expiring soon and my 24-month STEM OPT extension is still pending?Please contact your OISS Advisor for guidance on your situation. If there are any problems with your application and you are outside of the U.S., you may not be able to respond to USCIS in a timely manner, which could delay processing of your EAD.If your STEM OPT application is denied while outside the U.S., and your original OPT EAD has expired, you will not be able to re-enter the U.S. in F-1 status and will not be able to reapply.My F-1 visa has expired while I am on STEM OPT. What do I do?If you are traveling abroad and your F-1 visa has expired, you must obtain a new F-1 visa before returning to the U.S. (Canadians are exempt from this requirement). When going to your visa interview, bring the documents below:
Valid passport (at least 6 months in the future)
Valid STEM OPT I-20 with travel endorsement from an OISS advisor within the past 6 months
STEM OPT EAD Card
Proof of current STEM OPT employment (employer should match employer info listed on the I-20)
Evidence of sufficient funds (e.g. a bank statement, a letter from a sponsor or a job offer letter)
Check the U.S. Department of State website for the most up-to-date information about obtaining a visa and specific requirements at the local U.S. embassy or consulate.Practical mattersHealth insurance while on STEM OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern and your NU-SHIP coverage ends, we strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage. 
If you are employed full-time during OPT/STEM OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.What U.S. taxes am I subject to while on STEM OPT?It depends on how long you have been in the United States. 
Generally, foreign students in F-1 nonimmigrant status who have been in the U.S. more than 5 calendar years become resident aliens for U.S. tax purposes if they meet the “Substantial Presence Test” and are then liable for Social Security and Medicare taxes in addition to applicable federal, state and local taxes
Students participating in OPT/STEM OPT often reach the five year mark while on OPT or STEM OPT.
For additional information see the OISS resources on U.S. Taxes. Those employed by Northwestern University should consult the NU Human Resources Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.Ending STEM OPT, departing the U.S., & Changes of StatusWhile on STEM OPT, you continue to hold F-1 status sponsored by Northwestern University and your F-1 record remains active in SEVIS. It is extremely important that you notify your OISS advisor of any changes to your immigration status.If you are planning to leave the U.S. permanentlyYou must notify OISS before you leave the U.S. and submit a final employment evaluation from page 5 of the Form I-983 within 10 days of ending your employment. You can submit your evaluation and employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employment Update at the OISS Portal.If you change to another visa status in the U.S.If you change to another visa status in the U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this
U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this change by submitting a Report Change of Status request in the OISS Portal. You will also need to submit a completed final employment evaluation from page 5 of the I-983 within 10 days of changing your status.What is the H-1B Cap-Gap Extension?"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Disclaimer Statement
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and STEM OPT processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTReplacement EAD Card
Replacement EAD CardIf the case status on USCIS is showing that your EAD card was mailed, but you never received it, there is a possibility that it was undeliverable or lost by USPS (U.S. Postal Service). Follow these directions from USCIS on how to check your case status online.Replacement EAD lost in the mailIf your case status shows that your EAD card was mailed but you never received it, follow these steps:
Obtain the tracking number for your EAD card. Call USCIS to obtain the tracking number for your EAD Card. If you have registered for an account with USCIS.gov, the tracking information should show in your account if the card has been mailed.
Check the tracking number. If it shows “delivered,” contact USPS to see if they are able to locate the mail for you.  If USPS is responsible for the lost card, you will need to obtain an official letter on letterhead from USPS stating this. If approved, USCIS will then issue a new replacement EAD at no additional cost.
If USPS is not able to locate the missing mail (EAD Card), fill out the USCIS Non-Delivery of Card online form. You will need the receipt number.
If your case status shows “undeliverable”:It means that USPS may have returned the EAD to USCIS. 
Follow the instructions in the online USCIS case status to request that USCIS resend the card to you. Be sure that your address on file with USCIS is correct. If your address must be updated, do so as soon as possible through your online account.If USPS determines they are not responsible for the loss of the EAD:You will have to file for a replacement of lost EAD card and pay the USCIS I-765 filing fee again. See instructions below.Replacement, lost, stolen or damaged EAD cardStudents who need a replacement EAD Card (e.g., the original EAD Card was lost, stolen, destroyed, or it included an error by the applicant) will need to file original OPT paperwork and repay the USCIS I-765 fee to the Service Center.
You will need the following:
New form I-765 either e-filed or paper (if filing by mail) indicating reason for filing as: 1.b. - Replacement of lost, stolen or damaged employment authorization document. Remember: On the I-765 form, you must indicate you have previously applied for OPT or STEM and indicate your previous receipt numbers. (You previously applied and your card was lost, stolen, or damaged!)
Letter (from you) explaining the circumstances of how your EAD Card was lost, stolen, never received, or damaged. Attach any supporting evidence you have. For a stolen EAD Card, you should attach a police report. If you never received the EAD card at all, be sure to clearly state that in the letter.
Copy of OPT I-20 that was previously issued by OISS for your original OPT/STEM OPT application. It does not have to be issued within the past 30/60 days.
2 U.S. Passport Photos (with name and I-94 number written lightly in pencil on back of each), taken within the past 30 days.
USCIS Fee. See the USCIS I-765 page for current filing fee.
Copy of passport biographical page and F-1 visa stamp, if applicable.
Copy of most recent I-94 Record.
Copy of your previous OPT/STEM I-797 receipt notice and copy of original EAD Card, if applicable. 
If it is a replacement request due to an error by USCIS, the original EAD is required. Follow the directions in the next section.
If filing by mail: Form G-1145 to confirm receipt and obtain case number in advance of paper notification.
Document Checklist: Refer to the Apply for OPT or Apply for STEM OPT pages for specific instructions on how to prepare these documents for electronic filing or filing by mail.EAD correction due to USCIS errorIf you’ve received an EAD Card but it contains incorrect information due to an USCIS error (not a personal error) such as a typo in name or incorrect birthdate, you must return the original EAD card to get it corrected by USCIS. USCIS will issue a corrected EAD within 30 - 45 days of receiving the EAD that contains the error.
If you are not sure if the error is made by USCIS or you have questions, please contact your OISS Advisor. 
Instructions to have EAD corrected due to USCIS error:
(1) BEFORE following the instructions below, be sure that 1) you have made a photocopy of the card, 2) you have already provided the card for your employment hiring process, SSN application, or driver's license renewal, and 3) you do not have any international travel plans in the next 1-2 months.
(2) Go to the USCIS e-request page.
(3) Select "Typographic Error" under the “Service Request” section.
(4) Fill out and submit the "Typographic Error" e-form.
(5) You will receive an email with instructions. Follow the instructions to mail your EAD back to USCIS.
Please note: If USCIS determines that the card contains incorrect information that is NOT due to USCIS error, they will return the EAD Card. You will need to request a new EAD and repay the USCIS I-765 filing fee.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on STEM OPT
While on STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP), requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT and STEM OPT. As an F-1 student on STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so that you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that STEM OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to:
Reporting requirements while on STEM OPT
International Travel while on STEM OPT
Practical matters while on STEM OPT (health insurance, taxes, etc.)
Ending STEM OPT and departing the U.S. or changing status
Reporting Requirements while on STEM OPT Overview of reporting requirements while on STEM OPTUpdate your STEM employment or student personal information within 10 days of the change via Northwestern’s OISS Portal for alumni. Compared to your 12-month OPT period, there are additional requirements while on STEM OPT. Details of these requirements are outlined below.
The following information must be reported in the SEVP Portal during the STEM OPT period of authorization within 10 days of any changes or reporting deadlines:

Your residential address
Your phone and email address
Your residential address
Your phone and email address

The following information needs to be reported in the OISS Portal for alumni. Students on STEM OPT must report employment changes in the OISS Portal for your advisor to verify the I-983 training plan information.

Report any changes in your employment information including job title, address changes, employment end dates in the OISS Portal using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal.

You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.
You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.


Material Changes to your I-983 using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Validation Reports every 6 months using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
12-Month Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Final Evaluation I-983 at the end of each employment using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
24-Month Final Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)


Email your OISS advisor to report the following changes:

Date of exiting the U.S. if you leave the U.S. and will no longer pursue employment on STEM OPT
If your visa status changes while on STEM OPT
STEM OPT Data Validation Report - Every 6 monthsWhile on STEM OPT Extension, you are required to submit data validation reports 6, 12, 18 and 24 months after the STEM OPT Extension start date.
Every six months you will need to submit a STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal to confirm that your record in SEVIS accurately reflects your current circumstances. All students on the STEM OPT Extension will receive email notifications when it is time for you to submit your STEM OPT validation report. In the STEM OPT Validation, students are required to confirm this information:

Legal name.
Residential or mailing address.
Employer name and address.
Status of current employment.
Submit the annual evaluation at the I-983 12-month validation period, and the final evaluation at the I-983 24-month validation period
STEM OPT Extension students must report any change in the above information, including any loss of employment, within 10 days of the change.
A note about email reminders from SEVP: 
SEVP Portal users will receive a reminder via email 30 days before any validation report is due.  The email reminder will be sent to the email address in your SEVP portal account.12-month annual evaluations
You must submit Form I-983 page 5 “Evaluation of Student Progress” each 12 months and/or any time you leave an employer. You submit this in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the STEM OPT Validation request. The top portion is for the first 12 months. The Final Evaluation (bottom portion) is for 24 months and every time you leave a position.
Your employer must review and sign the self-evaluation to attest to the accuracy.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Check your STEM start date and mark your calendar for each 12-month interval of your STEM Extension for your reporting deadlines. You will receive emails from SEVP reminding you of your validation and evaluation timelines as well.
Reporting material changes to an existing Form I-983Students on F-1 STEM OPT must report to their OISS Advisor any material changes to, or material deviations from, the student's formal training plan. These changes must be reported via an updated Form I-983 submitted in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
As outlined in the form I-983 overview, material changes or deviations from the original Form I-983 may include, but are not limited to:
Any change of the employer’s EIN.
Any reduction in student compensation that is not tied to a reduction in hours worked.
Any significant decrease in hours per week that a student engages in a STEM training opportunity.
Changes to the employer’s commitments or student’s learning objectives as documented on the Form I-983.
Reporting requirements when changing employersIf you change employers while on the STEM OPT Extension, the new employer must be enrolled in E-Verify before you can begin to work. 
You must report any new employer via the OISS Portal with a new I-983 within 10 days of starting work for your new STEM OPT employer by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
When leaving a job or employer, you must submit your final evaluation on your form I-983 (page 5) for that employer and report your employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request at the OISS Portal.While on STEM OPT, what information do I need to report via the SEVP Portal?F-1 students participating in STEM OPT need to update the following via the SEVP Portal:
Physical home address
Mailing address
Telephone number
Unemployment while on STEM OPT ExtensionWhile on the STEM OPT Extension, you receive an additional 60 days of unemployment time in addition to any of the 90 days you did not use during your Post-Completion OPT, for a total of 150 days maximum unemployment days during the entire 36 months of OPT (12 months standard post-completion OPT + 24 months STEM OPT).
Unemployment Caution: 
SEVIS records may automatically terminate if no employment has been reported for 150 days.International travel while on STEM OPTCan I travel overseas while on STEM OPT Extension?Yes. Remember that your status is still F-1. To re-enter the U.S., you must have:
Valid EAD card
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old) with current employer information listed on 2nd page of I-20.  Need a new I-20? Request a Reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp or plans to renew yours. Canadians are not required to have an F-1 visa stamp.
Current passport (valid for at least 6 months into the future unless your passport country belongs to the Six Month Club
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
You may travel overseas while your STEM Extension is pending, as long as you have your receipt notice, post-completion OPT EAD card, and all other required documents.
Can I travel overseas if my original 12-month EAD is expiring soon and my 24-month STEM OPT extension is still pending?Please contact your OISS Advisor for guidance on your situation. If there are any problems with your application and you are outside of the U.S., you may not be able to respond to USCIS in a timely manner, which could delay processing of your EAD.If your STEM OPT application is denied while outside the U.S., and your original OPT EAD has expired, you will not be able to re-enter the U.S. in F-1 status and will not be able to reapply.My F-1 visa has expired while I am on STEM OPT. What do I do?If you are traveling abroad and your F-1 visa has expired, you must obtain a new F-1 visa before returning to the U.S. (Canadians are exempt from this requirement). When going to your visa interview, bring the documents below:
Valid passport (at least 6 months in the future)
Valid STEM OPT I-20 with travel endorsement from an OISS advisor within the past 6 months
STEM OPT EAD Card
Proof of current STEM OPT employment (employer should match employer info listed on the I-20)
Evidence of sufficient funds (e.g. a bank statement, a letter from a sponsor or a job offer letter)
Check the U.S. Department of State website for the most up-to-date information about obtaining a visa and specific requirements at the local U.S. embassy or consulate.Practical mattersHealth insurance while on STEM OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern and your NU-SHIP coverage ends, we strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage. 
If you are employed full-time during OPT/STEM OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.What U.S. taxes am I subject to while on STEM OPT?It depends on how long you have been in the United States. 
Generally, foreign students in F-1 nonimmigrant status who have been in the U.S. more than 5 calendar years become resident aliens for U.S. tax purposes if they meet the “Substantial Presence Test” and are then liable for Social Security and Medicare taxes in addition to applicable federal, state and local taxes
Students participating in OPT/STEM OPT often reach the five year mark while on OPT or STEM OPT.
For additional information see the OISS resources on U.S. Taxes. Those employed by Northwestern University should consult the NU Human Resources Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.Ending STEM OPT, departing the U.S., & Changes of StatusWhile on STEM OPT, you continue to hold F-1 status sponsored by Northwestern University and your F-1 record remains active in SEVIS. It is extremely important that you notify your OISS advisor of any changes to your immigration status.If you are planning to leave the U.S. permanentlyYou must notify OISS before you leave the U.S. and submit a final employment evaluation from page 5 of the Form I-983 within 10 days of ending your employment. You can submit your evaluation and employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employment Update at the OISS Portal.If you change to another visa status in the U.S.If you change to another visa status in the U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this
U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this change by submitting a Report Change of Status request in the OISS Portal. You will also need to submit a completed final employment evaluation from page 5 of the I-983 within 10 days of changing your status.What is the H-1B Cap-Gap Extension?"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Disclaimer Statement
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and STEM OPT processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on STEM OPT
While on STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP), requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT and STEM OPT. As an F-1 student on STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so that you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that STEM OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to:
Reporting requirements while on STEM OPT
International Travel while on STEM OPT
Practical matters while on STEM OPT (health insurance, taxes, etc.)
Ending STEM OPT and departing the U.S. or changing status
Reporting Requirements while on STEM OPT Overview of reporting requirements while on STEM OPTUpdate your STEM employment or student personal information within 10 days of the change via Northwestern’s OISS Portal for alumni. Compared to your 12-month OPT period, there are additional requirements while on STEM OPT. Details of these requirements are outlined below.
The following information must be reported in the SEVP Portal during the STEM OPT period of authorization within 10 days of any changes or reporting deadlines:

Your residential address
Your phone and email address
Your residential address
Your phone and email address

The following information needs to be reported in the OISS Portal for alumni. Students on STEM OPT must report employment changes in the OISS Portal for your advisor to verify the I-983 training plan information.

Report any changes in your employment information including job title, address changes, employment end dates in the OISS Portal using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal.

You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.
You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.


Material Changes to your I-983 using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Validation Reports every 6 months using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
12-Month Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Final Evaluation I-983 at the end of each employment using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
24-Month Final Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)


Email your OISS advisor to report the following changes:

Date of exiting the U.S. if you leave the U.S. and will no longer pursue employment on STEM OPT
If your visa status changes while on STEM OPT
STEM OPT Data Validation Report - Every 6 monthsWhile on STEM OPT Extension, you are required to submit data validation reports 6, 12, 18 and 24 months after the STEM OPT Extension start date.
Every six months you will need to submit a STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal to confirm that your record in SEVIS accurately reflects your current circumstances. All students on the STEM OPT Extension will receive email notifications when it is time for you to submit your STEM OPT validation report. In the STEM OPT Validation, students are required to confirm this information:

Legal name.
Residential or mailing address.
Employer name and address.
Status of current employment.
Submit the annual evaluation at the I-983 12-month validation period, and the final evaluation at the I-983 24-month validation period
STEM OPT Extension students must report any change in the above information, including any loss of employment, within 10 days of the change.
A note about email reminders from SEVP: 
SEVP Portal users will receive a reminder via email 30 days before any validation report is due.  The email reminder will be sent to the email address in your SEVP portal account.12-month annual evaluations
You must submit Form I-983 page 5 “Evaluation of Student Progress” each 12 months and/or any time you leave an employer. You submit this in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the STEM OPT Validation request. The top portion is for the first 12 months. The Final Evaluation (bottom portion) is for 24 months and every time you leave a position.
Your employer must review and sign the self-evaluation to attest to the accuracy.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Check your STEM start date and mark your calendar for each 12-month interval of your STEM Extension for your reporting deadlines. You will receive emails from SEVP reminding you of your validation and evaluation timelines as well.
Reporting material changes to an existing Form I-983Students on F-1 STEM OPT must report to their OISS Advisor any material changes to, or material deviations from, the student's formal training plan. These changes must be reported via an updated Form I-983 submitted in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
As outlined in the form I-983 overview, material changes or deviations from the original Form I-983 may include, but are not limited to:
Any change of the employer’s EIN.
Any reduction in student compensation that is not tied to a reduction in hours worked.
Any significant decrease in hours per week that a student engages in a STEM training opportunity.
Changes to the employer’s commitments or student’s learning objectives as documented on the Form I-983.
Reporting requirements when changing employersIf you change employers while on the STEM OPT Extension, the new employer must be enrolled in E-Verify before you can begin to work. 
You must report any new employer via the OISS Portal with a new I-983 within 10 days of starting work for your new STEM OPT employer by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
When leaving a job or employer, you must submit your final evaluation on your form I-983 (page 5) for that employer and report your employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request at the OISS Portal.While on STEM OPT, what information do I need to report via the SEVP Portal?F-1 students participating in STEM OPT need to update the following via the SEVP Portal:
Physical home address
Mailing address
Telephone number
Unemployment while on STEM OPT ExtensionWhile on the STEM OPT Extension, you receive an additional 60 days of unemployment time in addition to any of the 90 days you did not use during your Post-Completion OPT, for a total of 150 days maximum unemployment days during the entire 36 months of OPT (12 months standard post-completion OPT + 24 months STEM OPT).
Unemployment Caution: 
SEVIS records may automatically terminate if no employment has been reported for 150 days.International travel while on STEM OPTCan I travel overseas while on STEM OPT Extension?Yes. Remember that your status is still F-1. To re-enter the U.S., you must have:
Valid EAD card
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old) with current employer information listed on 2nd page of I-20.  Need a new I-20? Request a Reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp or plans to renew yours. Canadians are not required to have an F-1 visa stamp.
Current passport (valid for at least 6 months into the future unless your passport country belongs to the Six Month Club
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
You may travel overseas while your STEM Extension is pending, as long as you have your receipt notice, post-completion OPT EAD card, and all other required documents.
Can I travel overseas if my original 12-month EAD is expiring soon and my 24-month STEM OPT extension is still pending?Please contact your OISS Advisor for guidance on your situation. If there are any problems with your application and you are outside of the U.S., you may not be able to respond to USCIS in a timely manner, which could delay processing of your EAD.If your STEM OPT application is denied while outside the U.S., and your original OPT EAD has expired, you will not be able to re-enter the U.S. in F-1 status and will not be able to reapply.My F-1 visa has expired while I am on STEM OPT. What do I do?If you are traveling abroad and your F-1 visa has expired, you must obtain a new F-1 visa before returning to the U.S. (Canadians are exempt from this requirement). When going to your visa interview, bring the documents below:
Valid passport (at least 6 months in the future)
Valid STEM OPT I-20 with travel endorsement from an OISS advisor within the past 6 months
STEM OPT EAD Card
Proof of current STEM OPT employment (employer should match employer info listed on the I-20)
Evidence of sufficient funds (e.g. a bank statement, a letter from a sponsor or a job offer letter)
Check the U.S. Department of State website for the most up-to-date information about obtaining a visa and specific requirements at the local U.S. embassy or consulate.Practical mattersHealth insurance while on STEM OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern and your NU-SHIP coverage ends, we strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage. 
If you are employed full-time during OPT/STEM OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.What U.S. taxes am I subject to while on STEM OPT?It depends on how long you have been in the United States. 
Generally, foreign students in F-1 nonimmigrant status who have been in the U.S. more than 5 calendar years become resident aliens for U.S. tax purposes if they meet the “Substantial Presence Test” and are then liable for Social Security and Medicare taxes in addition to applicable federal, state and local taxes
Students participating in OPT/STEM OPT often reach the five year mark while on OPT or STEM OPT.
For additional information see the OISS resources on U.S. Taxes. Those employed by Northwestern University should consult the NU Human Resources Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.Ending STEM OPT, departing the U.S., & Changes of StatusWhile on STEM OPT, you continue to hold F-1 status sponsored by Northwestern University and your F-1 record remains active in SEVIS. It is extremely important that you notify your OISS advisor of any changes to your immigration status.If you are planning to leave the U.S. permanentlyYou must notify OISS before you leave the U.S. and submit a final employment evaluation from page 5 of the Form I-983 within 10 days of ending your employment. You can submit your evaluation and employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employment Update at the OISS Portal.If you change to another visa status in the U.S.If you change to another visa status in the U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this
U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this change by submitting a Report Change of Status request in the OISS Portal. You will also need to submit a completed final employment evaluation from page 5 of the I-983 within 10 days of changing your status.What is the H-1B Cap-Gap Extension?"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Disclaimer Statement
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and STEM OPT processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on STEM OPT
While on STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP), requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT and STEM OPT. As an F-1 student on STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so that you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that STEM OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to:
Reporting requirements while on STEM OPT
International Travel while on STEM OPT
Practical matters while on STEM OPT (health insurance, taxes, etc.)
Ending STEM OPT and departing the U.S. or changing status
Reporting Requirements while on STEM OPT Overview of reporting requirements while on STEM OPTUpdate your STEM employment or student personal information within 10 days of the change via Northwestern’s OISS Portal for alumni. Compared to your 12-month OPT period, there are additional requirements while on STEM OPT. Details of these requirements are outlined below.
The following information must be reported in the SEVP Portal during the STEM OPT period of authorization within 10 days of any changes or reporting deadlines:

Your residential address
Your phone and email address
Your residential address
Your phone and email address

The following information needs to be reported in the OISS Portal for alumni. Students on STEM OPT must report employment changes in the OISS Portal for your advisor to verify the I-983 training plan information.

Report any changes in your employment information including job title, address changes, employment end dates in the OISS Portal using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal.

You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.
You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.


Material Changes to your I-983 using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Validation Reports every 6 months using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
12-Month Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Final Evaluation I-983 at the end of each employment using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
24-Month Final Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)


Email your OISS advisor to report the following changes:

Date of exiting the U.S. if you leave the U.S. and will no longer pursue employment on STEM OPT
If your visa status changes while on STEM OPT
STEM OPT Data Validation Report - Every 6 monthsWhile on STEM OPT Extension, you are required to submit data validation reports 6, 12, 18 and 24 months after the STEM OPT Extension start date.
Every six months you will need to submit a STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal to confirm that your record in SEVIS accurately reflects your current circumstances. All students on the STEM OPT Extension will receive email notifications when it is time for you to submit your STEM OPT validation report. In the STEM OPT Validation, students are required to confirm this information:

Legal name.
Residential or mailing address.
Employer name and address.
Status of current employment.
Submit the annual evaluation at the I-983 12-month validation period, and the final evaluation at the I-983 24-month validation period
STEM OPT Extension students must report any change in the above information, including any loss of employment, within 10 days of the change.
A note about email reminders from SEVP: 
SEVP Portal users will receive a reminder via email 30 days before any validation report is due.  The email reminder will be sent to the email address in your SEVP portal account.12-month annual evaluations
You must submit Form I-983 page 5 “Evaluation of Student Progress” each 12 months and/or any time you leave an employer. You submit this in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the STEM OPT Validation request. The top portion is for the first 12 months. The Final Evaluation (bottom portion) is for 24 months and every time you leave a position.
Your employer must review and sign the self-evaluation to attest to the accuracy.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Check your STEM start date and mark your calendar for each 12-month interval of your STEM Extension for your reporting deadlines. You will receive emails from SEVP reminding you of your validation and evaluation timelines as well.
Reporting material changes to an existing Form I-983Students on F-1 STEM OPT must report to their OISS Advisor any material changes to, or material deviations from, the student's formal training plan. These changes must be reported via an updated Form I-983 submitted in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
As outlined in the form I-983 overview, material changes or deviations from the original Form I-983 may include, but are not limited to:
Any change of the employer’s EIN.
Any reduction in student compensation that is not tied to a reduction in hours worked.
Any significant decrease in hours per week that a student engages in a STEM training opportunity.
Changes to the employer’s commitments or student’s learning objectives as documented on the Form I-983.
Reporting requirements when changing employersIf you change employers while on the STEM OPT Extension, the new employer must be enrolled in E-Verify before you can begin to work. 
You must report any new employer via the OISS Portal with a new I-983 within 10 days of starting work for your new STEM OPT employer by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
When leaving a job or employer, you must submit your final evaluation on your form I-983 (page 5) for that employer and report your employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request at the OISS Portal.While on STEM OPT, what information do I need to report via the SEVP Portal?F-1 students participating in STEM OPT need to update the following via the SEVP Portal:
Physical home address
Mailing address
Telephone number
Unemployment while on STEM OPT ExtensionWhile on the STEM OPT Extension, you receive an additional 60 days of unemployment time in addition to any of the 90 days you did not use during your Post-Completion OPT, for a total of 150 days maximum unemployment days during the entire 36 months of OPT (12 months standard post-completion OPT + 24 months STEM OPT).
Unemployment Caution: 
SEVIS records may automatically terminate if no employment has been reported for 150 days.International travel while on STEM OPTCan I travel overseas while on STEM OPT Extension?Yes. Remember that your status is still F-1. To re-enter the U.S., you must have:
Valid EAD card
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old) with current employer information listed on 2nd page of I-20.  Need a new I-20? Request a Reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp or plans to renew yours. Canadians are not required to have an F-1 visa stamp.
Current passport (valid for at least 6 months into the future unless your passport country belongs to the Six Month Club
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
You may travel overseas while your STEM Extension is pending, as long as you have your receipt notice, post-completion OPT EAD card, and all other required documents.
Can I travel overseas if my original 12-month EAD is expiring soon and my 24-month STEM OPT extension is still pending?Please contact your OISS Advisor for guidance on your situation. If there are any problems with your application and you are outside of the U.S., you may not be able to respond to USCIS in a timely manner, which could delay processing of your EAD.If your STEM OPT application is denied while outside the U.S., and your original OPT EAD has expired, you will not be able to re-enter the U.S. in F-1 status and will not be able to reapply.My F-1 visa has expired while I am on STEM OPT. What do I do?If you are traveling abroad and your F-1 visa has expired, you must obtain a new F-1 visa before returning to the U.S. (Canadians are exempt from this requirement). When going to your visa interview, bring the documents below:
Valid passport (at least 6 months in the future)
Valid STEM OPT I-20 with travel endorsement from an OISS advisor within the past 6 months
STEM OPT EAD Card
Proof of current STEM OPT employment (employer should match employer info listed on the I-20)
Evidence of sufficient funds (e.g. a bank statement, a letter from a sponsor or a job offer letter)
Check the U.S. Department of State website for the most up-to-date information about obtaining a visa and specific requirements at the local U.S. embassy or consulate.Practical mattersHealth insurance while on STEM OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern and your NU-SHIP coverage ends, we strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage. 
If you are employed full-time during OPT/STEM OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.What U.S. taxes am I subject to while on STEM OPT?It depends on how long you have been in the United States. 
Generally, foreign students in F-1 nonimmigrant status who have been in the U.S. more than 5 calendar years become resident aliens for U.S. tax purposes if they meet the “Substantial Presence Test” and are then liable for Social Security and Medicare taxes in addition to applicable federal, state and local taxes
Students participating in OPT/STEM OPT often reach the five year mark while on OPT or STEM OPT.
For additional information see the OISS resources on U.S. Taxes. Those employed by Northwestern University should consult the NU Human Resources Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.Ending STEM OPT, departing the U.S., & Changes of StatusWhile on STEM OPT, you continue to hold F-1 status sponsored by Northwestern University and your F-1 record remains active in SEVIS. It is extremely important that you notify your OISS advisor of any changes to your immigration status.If you are planning to leave the U.S. permanentlyYou must notify OISS before you leave the U.S. and submit a final employment evaluation from page 5 of the Form I-983 within 10 days of ending your employment. You can submit your evaluation and employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employment Update at the OISS Portal.If you change to another visa status in the U.S.If you change to another visa status in the U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this
U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this change by submitting a Report Change of Status request in the OISS Portal. You will also need to submit a completed final employment evaluation from page 5 of the I-983 within 10 days of changing your status.What is the H-1B Cap-Gap Extension?"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Disclaimer Statement
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and STEM OPT processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on STEM OPT
While on STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP), requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT and STEM OPT. As an F-1 student on STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so that you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that STEM OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to:
Reporting requirements while on STEM OPT
International Travel while on STEM OPT
Practical matters while on STEM OPT (health insurance, taxes, etc.)
Ending STEM OPT and departing the U.S. or changing status
Reporting Requirements while on STEM OPT Overview of reporting requirements while on STEM OPTUpdate your STEM employment or student personal information within 10 days of the change via Northwestern’s OISS Portal for alumni. Compared to your 12-month OPT period, there are additional requirements while on STEM OPT. Details of these requirements are outlined below.
The following information must be reported in the SEVP Portal during the STEM OPT period of authorization within 10 days of any changes or reporting deadlines:

Your residential address
Your phone and email address
Your residential address
Your phone and email address

The following information needs to be reported in the OISS Portal for alumni. Students on STEM OPT must report employment changes in the OISS Portal for your advisor to verify the I-983 training plan information.

Report any changes in your employment information including job title, address changes, employment end dates in the OISS Portal using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal.

You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.
You must submit a new I-983 training plan for every new employer and every change to your I-983.


Material Changes to your I-983 using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Validation Reports every 6 months using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
12-Month Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
Final Evaluation I-983 at the end of each employment using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)
24-Month Final Evaluation I-983 using the STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal (see below for details)


Email your OISS advisor to report the following changes:

Date of exiting the U.S. if you leave the U.S. and will no longer pursue employment on STEM OPT
If your visa status changes while on STEM OPT
STEM OPT Data Validation Report - Every 6 monthsWhile on STEM OPT Extension, you are required to submit data validation reports 6, 12, 18 and 24 months after the STEM OPT Extension start date.
Every six months you will need to submit a STEM OPT Validation request in the OISS Portal to confirm that your record in SEVIS accurately reflects your current circumstances. All students on the STEM OPT Extension will receive email notifications when it is time for you to submit your STEM OPT validation report. In the STEM OPT Validation, students are required to confirm this information:

Legal name.
Residential or mailing address.
Employer name and address.
Status of current employment.
Submit the annual evaluation at the I-983 12-month validation period, and the final evaluation at the I-983 24-month validation period
STEM OPT Extension students must report any change in the above information, including any loss of employment, within 10 days of the change.
A note about email reminders from SEVP: 
SEVP Portal users will receive a reminder via email 30 days before any validation report is due.  The email reminder will be sent to the email address in your SEVP portal account.12-month annual evaluations
You must submit Form I-983 page 5 “Evaluation of Student Progress” each 12 months and/or any time you leave an employer. You submit this in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the STEM OPT Validation request. The top portion is for the first 12 months. The Final Evaluation (bottom portion) is for 24 months and every time you leave a position.
Your employer must review and sign the self-evaluation to attest to the accuracy.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Your F-1 record may be terminated if you fail to submit your evaluations.
Check your STEM start date and mark your calendar for each 12-month interval of your STEM Extension for your reporting deadlines. You will receive emails from SEVP reminding you of your validation and evaluation timelines as well.
Reporting material changes to an existing Form I-983Students on F-1 STEM OPT must report to their OISS Advisor any material changes to, or material deviations from, the student's formal training plan. These changes must be reported via an updated Form I-983 submitted in the OISS Portal for alumni by using the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
As outlined in the form I-983 overview, material changes or deviations from the original Form I-983 may include, but are not limited to:
Any change of the employer’s EIN.
Any reduction in student compensation that is not tied to a reduction in hours worked.
Any significant decrease in hours per week that a student engages in a STEM training opportunity.
Changes to the employer’s commitments or student’s learning objectives as documented on the Form I-983.
Reporting requirements when changing employersIf you change employers while on the STEM OPT Extension, the new employer must be enrolled in E-Verify before you can begin to work. 
You must report any new employer via the OISS Portal with a new I-983 within 10 days of starting work for your new STEM OPT employer by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
When leaving a job or employer, you must submit your final evaluation on your form I-983 (page 5) for that employer and report your employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request at the OISS Portal.While on STEM OPT, what information do I need to report via the SEVP Portal?F-1 students participating in STEM OPT need to update the following via the SEVP Portal:
Physical home address
Mailing address
Telephone number
Unemployment while on STEM OPT ExtensionWhile on the STEM OPT Extension, you receive an additional 60 days of unemployment time in addition to any of the 90 days you did not use during your Post-Completion OPT, for a total of 150 days maximum unemployment days during the entire 36 months of OPT (12 months standard post-completion OPT + 24 months STEM OPT).
Unemployment Caution: 
SEVIS records may automatically terminate if no employment has been reported for 150 days.International travel while on STEM OPTCan I travel overseas while on STEM OPT Extension?Yes. Remember that your status is still F-1. To re-enter the U.S., you must have:
Valid EAD card
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old) with current employer information listed on 2nd page of I-20.  Need a new I-20? Request a Reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp or plans to renew yours. Canadians are not required to have an F-1 visa stamp.
Current passport (valid for at least 6 months into the future unless your passport country belongs to the Six Month Club
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
You may travel overseas while your STEM Extension is pending, as long as you have your receipt notice, post-completion OPT EAD card, and all other required documents.
Can I travel overseas if my original 12-month EAD is expiring soon and my 24-month STEM OPT extension is still pending?Please contact your OISS Advisor for guidance on your situation. If there are any problems with your application and you are outside of the U.S., you may not be able to respond to USCIS in a timely manner, which could delay processing of your EAD.If your STEM OPT application is denied while outside the U.S., and your original OPT EAD has expired, you will not be able to re-enter the U.S. in F-1 status and will not be able to reapply.My F-1 visa has expired while I am on STEM OPT. What do I do?If you are traveling abroad and your F-1 visa has expired, you must obtain a new F-1 visa before returning to the U.S. (Canadians are exempt from this requirement). When going to your visa interview, bring the documents below:
Valid passport (at least 6 months in the future)
Valid STEM OPT I-20 with travel endorsement from an OISS advisor within the past 6 months
STEM OPT EAD Card
Proof of current STEM OPT employment (employer should match employer info listed on the I-20)
Evidence of sufficient funds (e.g. a bank statement, a letter from a sponsor or a job offer letter)
Check the U.S. Department of State website for the most up-to-date information about obtaining a visa and specific requirements at the local U.S. embassy or consulate.Practical mattersHealth insurance while on STEM OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern and your NU-SHIP coverage ends, we strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage. 
If you are employed full-time during OPT/STEM OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.What U.S. taxes am I subject to while on STEM OPT?It depends on how long you have been in the United States. 
Generally, foreign students in F-1 nonimmigrant status who have been in the U.S. more than 5 calendar years become resident aliens for U.S. tax purposes if they meet the “Substantial Presence Test” and are then liable for Social Security and Medicare taxes in addition to applicable federal, state and local taxes
Students participating in OPT/STEM OPT often reach the five year mark while on OPT or STEM OPT.
For additional information see the OISS resources on U.S. Taxes. Those employed by Northwestern University should consult the NU Human Resources Tax Information for Foreign Nationals.Ending STEM OPT, departing the U.S., & Changes of StatusWhile on STEM OPT, you continue to hold F-1 status sponsored by Northwestern University and your F-1 record remains active in SEVIS. It is extremely important that you notify your OISS advisor of any changes to your immigration status.If you are planning to leave the U.S. permanentlyYou must notify OISS before you leave the U.S. and submit a final employment evaluation from page 5 of the Form I-983 within 10 days of ending your employment. You can submit your evaluation and employment end date by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employment Update at the OISS Portal.If you change to another visa status in the U.S.If you change to another visa status in the U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this
U.S., such as H-1B, E-3, G-4, TN, etc. or obtain Permanent Resident status, you must report this change by submitting a Report Change of Status request in the OISS Portal. You will also need to submit a completed final employment evaluation from page 5 of the I-983 within 10 days of changing your status.What is the H-1B Cap-Gap Extension?"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Disclaimer Statement
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and STEM OPT processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on OPT
While on OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to :
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Employment and Unemployment on OPTDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment. There are limits to what jobs count as employment and to the number of days you may remain unemployed.When can I start working?On the start date of your approved EAD card. You must physically have the EAD card to start working. If your OPT approval or EAD card is delayed or lost, contact your OISS advisor to discuss your work options.What counts as "employment" while I am on OPT?Employment must be:
a job that is directly related to the student’s major area of study; if the relationship between the job and a student's field of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship.
at least 20 hours per week; if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student’s 90 days of unemployment. Each job should be marked as "full-time" (at least 20 hours per week or more) or "part-time" (less than 20 hours per week).
paid or unpaid.

Students on OPT should keep all records of employment. You may be asked to provide employment records during future USCIS application processes. Per the SEVP OPT Guidance document, the types of employment allowed during post-completion OPT include (these DO NOT apply to the STEM Extension):




Paid employment

Students may work in a job related to their field of study 20 hours or more per week (if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student's 90 days of unemployment).
Multiple employers or gigs

Students may work for more than one employer, but all employment must be related to the student’s major area of study. If a student is working with gigs, students should maintain a list of all gigs, the dates and duration.



Work for hire commonly referred to as "1099 employment"

This is a type of employment where an individual performs a service based on a contractual relationship rather than an employment relationship. If requested by DHS, students must be prepared to provide evidence showing the duration of the contract periods and the name and address of the contracting company.



Work for yourself or self-employed business owner
Work for yourself or self-employed business owner

Students may start a business and be self-employed. In this situation, the student must work full-time ( 20 hours or more per week) and be able to provide proof that their work is related to their program of study at NU. The student must be able to prove that he or she has the proper business licenses and is actively engaged in a business related to the student’s degree program.



Employment through an agency

Students must be able to provide evidence showing they worked an average of over 20 hours or more per week while employed by the agency.



Unpaid employment

Students on post-completion OPT may work as volunteers or unpaid interns. The work must be 20 hours or more per week. These students must be able to provide evidence from the employer that the student worked 20 hours or more per week the period of employment.
Unemployment 90-day ruleDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment.
Students on post-completion OPT may have up to 90 days of unemployment. The 90 days start counting from your approved OPT/EAD start date (not the recommended start date nor the program end date on your I-20) and are cumulative.
If you accumulate 90 days or more of unemployment, you are in violation of your F-1 status. You are expected to leave the U.S., transfer to another school, or change your visa status before the 90th day. See Options after OPT Ends.
Students who are granted a 24-month STEM extension are given an additional 60 days of unemployment for a total of 150 days over their entire post-completion OPT and STEM OPT periods.
Approved vacation from a job does not count as "unemployment" if you are still considered an employee there.
To ensure that you do not exceed the 90 day unemployment limit while on OPT, it is necessary to secure a full-time job, which is defined by USCIS as working 20 hours or more per week. Any job that involves working 20 hours or less per week will be apply toward your 90-day unemployment limit.
How do I know if my job is related to my degree and why is this important?Federal regulations require that all employment that you engage in while on OPT be directly related to your major area of study.  As part of your OPT reporting requirements, you must provide a description demonstrating a logical connection between your regular job duties and your major area of study. Further information and sample descriptions are available on the SEVP Policy Guidance: Practical Training – Determining a Direct Relationship Between Employment and a Student’s Major Area of Study page.
If the relationship between the job and a student's major area of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship. OISS won't be able to advise you on specifically which jobs do/do not qualify as we are not experts in your field of study. If you need assistance determining the fit of a job offer, we recommend discussing this with your academic adviser, the relevant Northwestern Career Office, or others in your field.What documentation do I need to maintain during my OPT employment?It is recommended that students maintain evidence for each job:
the position held,
duration of the position (start date and end date)
the job title
contact information for the student’s supervisor or manager
description of the work

Students must always report employment changes within 10 days of any change.
While on OPT, you are required to use the SEVP Portal to keep your SEVIS record up-to-date and report certain information to maintain your F-1 status. To keep your SEVIS record updated, the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) will email you a link to create a SEVP Portal account on or close to your OPT start date. You be required to use the SEVP Portal to:
Report your employment information within 10 days of starting or stopping a job.
Report how your job relates to your major area of study with a few sentences.
Update your address within 10 days of moving.
Changing employers/ multiple employersStudents may have multiple jobs and change jobs as many times as they wish during OPT, provided that all employment is directly related to their major area of study and the work is 20 hours or more per week. No special permission is required to change employers. However, you must update your employer information in the SEVP Portal within 10 days of the change.Reporting Requirements & Other RulesImportant rules to remember while on OPT are:
You may only work from the start date of your EAD card to the end date of your EAD card.The EAD card reads:          Valid From:_________ (start date)Card Expires: __________(end date)
All employment must be related to your major area of study.
You must report all employment and address changes to the SEVP Portal within 10 days of any change.
You are limited to 90 days of unemployment during your OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.

Below you will find additional details on OPT reporting requirements and other guidelinesReport any changes in address, employer, name, or status in the U.S. within 10 daysOnce your OPT is approved and your start date has passed, SEVP will send you login information (via email)  to create a SEVP Portal account. If you do not receive this email within one week, contact your OISS advisor for help to gain access to the SEVP portal. Be sure to check your Northwestern Email (including your spam/junk folder!) for the SEVP portal account setup email.  
You must report any changes (in address, employer, name or status in the U.S.) within 10 days. All reporting must be done in the SEVP Portal. If you are unable to report changes in the SEVP Portal, the OISS Portal will allow you to report any changes in your employment or personal details by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
See the SEVP Portal resource for additional detailed information.What records do I need to keep while on OPT?It is your responsibility to keep records of your employment, paid or unpaid. You may be asked about these records in the future (for example, if you apply for an H-1B, Legal Permanent Residency or other U.S. immigration status). Examples of records to keep include offer letters, contracts, payroll records, all job start/end dates, employer names, employer addresses and number of hours per week worked.Additional guidance for OPT studentsTaking classes while on OPTWhile on OPT, your primary purpose is to maintain OPT by working.  Incidental study (classes for fun or professional development) are allowed as a supplement to your work as long as you continue to work full-time.
If you decide to return to school full-time, you will need to transfer your SEVIS Record to the new school. If returning to Northwestern University, you should submit the Change of Level request at the OISS Portal. 
Your OPT will end on the date of your SEVIS transfer and you will no longer have work authorization.Health insurance while on OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern, your NU-SHIP coverage can continue through the end of the current academic year (September-August) or you are eligible to end your coverage early. We strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT time period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage.
If you are employed full-time during OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.How do I login to the OISS Portal after I graduate and my NetID is deactivated?Upon completion of your degree, your NetID automatically expires and will be deactivated by the university within 148 days. As your NetID is used to access the OISS portal, this will cause you to lose access to your OISS portal account. To prevent this from occurring, you will need to transition to new login credentials.
The OISS will first need to convert your portal account user ID from your NetID to your email address.Once your account user ID has been converted, you will receive an email with subject line:"Northwestern Office of International Student & Scholar Services Portal Account Conversion & NewLogin Credentials"
The email will list your new user ID (your email address) and a temporary password.
The temporary password will be valid for 30 days. If you do not log in within 30 days of receiving the email, you must reset your password (see below).
Your username is your email address that is listed as your “User ID” in your “Portal Account Conversion and New Login Credentials” email. Your password is the “Temp Password” from the same email.
You will be prompted to create a new password. This new password will be used for all future logins to the OISS Portal.
If you did not login within 30 days or receiving the email with  your temporary password, please follow the directions in the OISS Portal Guide for Alumni whose NetIDs are deactivated (instructions can be found on page 4).
Logging in to OISS Portal after graduation & deactivation of your NetID
In order to access your OISS portal account using your new login credentials, you must click on the Log in with OISS Portal Account (rather than Login with NetID).

 Filing and paying U.S. TaxesWhile on OPT, you are subject to all applicable federal, state and local taxes and must file taxes. See more information on the OISS webpage about U.S. Taxes.Traveling while on OPTRemember that your status is still F-1 while on OPT. If you travel abroad while on OPT, you must have the following to re-enter the U.S.:
Valid EAD card. This means you may not be granted re-entry to the U.S. until your OPT is approved and you have your physical EAD card.  Please discuss your travel plans with your OISS advisor, especially if you plan to travel after graduation.
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old). Need a new travel signature?  Request an I-20 reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
Current passport
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
IMPORTANT NOTE: 
If you do not apply for OPT but travel outside of the U.S. after the end date listed on your I-20 during the 60-day grace-period, you will have negated your eligibility to re-enter the U.S to apply for OPT. Your only option is to file online and there are some risks. Discuss your options with your OISS advisor if this is your circumstance.OPT ResourcesApply for STEM OPT
SEVP Portal
SEVP Portal Login page
OISS Portal - Login Guide for Alumni
OISS Portal -  User Guide for AlumniExtensions of OPT24 Month STEM OPT ExtensionStudents who have received a U.S. Bachelor’s, Master’s, or Doctoral degree in a STEM field (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) may be eligible to apply for a 24 Month STEM Extension of post-completion OPT (for a total eligibility of up to 36 months of OPT). You must apply for the STEM Extension before the end date of your EAD card.
Learn more:Apply for STEM OPTCap-Gap extension for future H-1B employees"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Options after OPT EndsYou are allowed a 60-day grace period following your OPT end date to leave the United States, change your immigration status, transfer your F-1 record to a new school,l or begin a new program at NU. You may want to pursue these options before the end of your OPT. If you remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without transferring to a new school, beginning your new program, or having applied for a timely filed Change of Status, you may begin accruing days of Unlawful Presence, which has serious consequences depending on the length of the overstay. Read more about each of the options:60-day grace period to leave the United StatesIf your plan is to depart the United States after OPT, you must do so within your 60-day grace period. You must stop working by the end date (card expires date) on your EAD card.
If you are leaving the United States permanently before the end date on your EAD, you must report this via the "Early Departure Notification" in the OISS Portal so OISS can complete your SEVIS record and F status. Changing immigration statusDuring OPT
If you are approved for a change of visa status during your OPT, you must report this to the OISS by submitting a "Report Change of Status" request in the OISS Portal so we can update your SEVIS record.
After OPT
If you have a pending change of status after your OPT ends, check with the immigration legal counsel working on your change of status application to determine what options are available to you and if you may remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without a negative impact to your immigration status
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
If you have a pending or approved change of status to H-1B, you may be eligible for a Cap-Gap Extension I-20. Please consult with your OISS advisor to determine your eligibility for issuance of an I-20 reflecting this extension.Pursuing a new program of study in the U.S.During OPT
If you wish to start a new full-time academic program while on OPT, the remainder of the OPT must be forfeited before beginning classes with the new program.
If you are beginning a program of study at another U.S. school, you must request a "Transfer Out" in order to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school.
If you are beginning a new program of study at Northwestern University, you must submit a "Change of Level" request at the OISS Portal.

After OPT
If you are planning to go back to school after your OPT, you will need to submit either a "Transfer Out" request to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school or request a "Change of Level I-20" if returning to Northwestern University.  Both of these requests are submitted via the OISS Portal. The "Tranfer-Out" or "Change of Level" request must be completed before the end of the 60-day grace period following the OPT end date.
Students should keep in mind the following points when deciding on when to request a Transfer Out of their SEVIS record:
After the SEVIS transfer release date has passed, students may not continue working on OPT, even if the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) has not expired. The transfer release date, in effect, cancels the EAD.
The SEVIS transfer release date can be within the OPT period dates listed on the EAD or up to 60 days after the expiration date on the EAD.
Classes at the new school must begin within 5 months of the transfer release date or at the start of the next available term, whichever is earlier.
Students may request a transfer release date in the future and continue working on OPT until that date as long as the EAD has not expired, and the new program of study has not yet begun.
If the length of time between the OPT end date and the start date of classes at the new school will be more than five months, please meet with your OISS Advisor to discuss your options.
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on OPT
While on OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to :
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Employment and Unemployment on OPTDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment. There are limits to what jobs count as employment and to the number of days you may remain unemployed.When can I start working?On the start date of your approved EAD card. You must physically have the EAD card to start working. If your OPT approval or EAD card is delayed or lost, contact your OISS advisor to discuss your work options.What counts as "employment" while I am on OPT?Employment must be:
a job that is directly related to the student’s major area of study; if the relationship between the job and a student's field of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship.
at least 20 hours per week; if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student’s 90 days of unemployment. Each job should be marked as "full-time" (at least 20 hours per week or more) or "part-time" (less than 20 hours per week).
paid or unpaid.

Students on OPT should keep all records of employment. You may be asked to provide employment records during future USCIS application processes. Per the SEVP OPT Guidance document, the types of employment allowed during post-completion OPT include (these DO NOT apply to the STEM Extension):




Paid employment

Students may work in a job related to their field of study 20 hours or more per week (if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student's 90 days of unemployment).
Multiple employers or gigs

Students may work for more than one employer, but all employment must be related to the student’s major area of study. If a student is working with gigs, students should maintain a list of all gigs, the dates and duration.



Work for hire commonly referred to as "1099 employment"

This is a type of employment where an individual performs a service based on a contractual relationship rather than an employment relationship. If requested by DHS, students must be prepared to provide evidence showing the duration of the contract periods and the name and address of the contracting company.



Work for yourself or self-employed business owner
Work for yourself or self-employed business owner

Students may start a business and be self-employed. In this situation, the student must work full-time ( 20 hours or more per week) and be able to provide proof that their work is related to their program of study at NU. The student must be able to prove that he or she has the proper business licenses and is actively engaged in a business related to the student’s degree program.



Employment through an agency

Students must be able to provide evidence showing they worked an average of over 20 hours or more per week while employed by the agency.



Unpaid employment

Students on post-completion OPT may work as volunteers or unpaid interns. The work must be 20 hours or more per week. These students must be able to provide evidence from the employer that the student worked 20 hours or more per week the period of employment.
Unemployment 90-day ruleDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment.
Students on post-completion OPT may have up to 90 days of unemployment. The 90 days start counting from your approved OPT/EAD start date (not the recommended start date nor the program end date on your I-20) and are cumulative.
If you accumulate 90 days or more of unemployment, you are in violation of your F-1 status. You are expected to leave the U.S., transfer to another school, or change your visa status before the 90th day. See Options after OPT Ends.
Students who are granted a 24-month STEM extension are given an additional 60 days of unemployment for a total of 150 days over their entire post-completion OPT and STEM OPT periods.
Approved vacation from a job does not count as "unemployment" if you are still considered an employee there.
To ensure that you do not exceed the 90 day unemployment limit while on OPT, it is necessary to secure a full-time job, which is defined by USCIS as working 20 hours or more per week. Any job that involves working 20 hours or less per week will be apply toward your 90-day unemployment limit.
How do I know if my job is related to my degree and why is this important?Federal regulations require that all employment that you engage in while on OPT be directly related to your major area of study.  As part of your OPT reporting requirements, you must provide a description demonstrating a logical connection between your regular job duties and your major area of study. Further information and sample descriptions are available on the SEVP Policy Guidance: Practical Training – Determining a Direct Relationship Between Employment and a Student’s Major Area of Study page.
If the relationship between the job and a student's major area of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship. OISS won't be able to advise you on specifically which jobs do/do not qualify as we are not experts in your field of study. If you need assistance determining the fit of a job offer, we recommend discussing this with your academic adviser, the relevant Northwestern Career Office, or others in your field.What documentation do I need to maintain during my OPT employment?It is recommended that students maintain evidence for each job:
the position held,
duration of the position (start date and end date)
the job title
contact information for the student’s supervisor or manager
description of the work

Students must always report employment changes within 10 days of any change.
While on OPT, you are required to use the SEVP Portal to keep your SEVIS record up-to-date and report certain information to maintain your F-1 status. To keep your SEVIS record updated, the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) will email you a link to create a SEVP Portal account on or close to your OPT start date. You be required to use the SEVP Portal to:
Report your employment information within 10 days of starting or stopping a job.
Report how your job relates to your major area of study with a few sentences.
Update your address within 10 days of moving.
Changing employers/ multiple employersStudents may have multiple jobs and change jobs as many times as they wish during OPT, provided that all employment is directly related to their major area of study and the work is 20 hours or more per week. No special permission is required to change employers. However, you must update your employer information in the SEVP Portal within 10 days of the change.Reporting Requirements & Other RulesImportant rules to remember while on OPT are:
You may only work from the start date of your EAD card to the end date of your EAD card.The EAD card reads:          Valid From:_________ (start date)Card Expires: __________(end date)
All employment must be related to your major area of study.
You must report all employment and address changes to the SEVP Portal within 10 days of any change.
You are limited to 90 days of unemployment during your OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.

Below you will find additional details on OPT reporting requirements and other guidelinesReport any changes in address, employer, name, or status in the U.S. within 10 daysOnce your OPT is approved and your start date has passed, SEVP will send you login information (via email)  to create a SEVP Portal account. If you do not receive this email within one week, contact your OISS advisor for help to gain access to the SEVP portal. Be sure to check your Northwestern Email (including your spam/junk folder!) for the SEVP portal account setup email.  
You must report any changes (in address, employer, name or status in the U.S.) within 10 days. All reporting must be done in the SEVP Portal. If you are unable to report changes in the SEVP Portal, the OISS Portal will allow you to report any changes in your employment or personal details by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
See the SEVP Portal resource for additional detailed information.What records do I need to keep while on OPT?It is your responsibility to keep records of your employment, paid or unpaid. You may be asked about these records in the future (for example, if you apply for an H-1B, Legal Permanent Residency or other U.S. immigration status). Examples of records to keep include offer letters, contracts, payroll records, all job start/end dates, employer names, employer addresses and number of hours per week worked.Additional guidance for OPT studentsTaking classes while on OPTWhile on OPT, your primary purpose is to maintain OPT by working.  Incidental study (classes for fun or professional development) are allowed as a supplement to your work as long as you continue to work full-time.
If you decide to return to school full-time, you will need to transfer your SEVIS Record to the new school. If returning to Northwestern University, you should submit the Change of Level request at the OISS Portal. 
Your OPT will end on the date of your SEVIS transfer and you will no longer have work authorization.Health insurance while on OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern, your NU-SHIP coverage can continue through the end of the current academic year (September-August) or you are eligible to end your coverage early. We strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT time period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage.
If you are employed full-time during OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.How do I login to the OISS Portal after I graduate and my NetID is deactivated?Upon completion of your degree, your NetID automatically expires and will be deactivated by the university within 148 days. As your NetID is used to access the OISS portal, this will cause you to lose access to your OISS portal account. To prevent this from occurring, you will need to transition to new login credentials.
The OISS will first need to convert your portal account user ID from your NetID to your email address.Once your account user ID has been converted, you will receive an email with subject line:"Northwestern Office of International Student & Scholar Services Portal Account Conversion & NewLogin Credentials"
The email will list your new user ID (your email address) and a temporary password.
The temporary password will be valid for 30 days. If you do not log in within 30 days of receiving the email, you must reset your password (see below).
Your username is your email address that is listed as your “User ID” in your “Portal Account Conversion and New Login Credentials” email. Your password is the “Temp Password” from the same email.
You will be prompted to create a new password. This new password will be used for all future logins to the OISS Portal.
If you did not login within 30 days or receiving the email with  your temporary password, please follow the directions in the OISS Portal Guide for Alumni whose NetIDs are deactivated (instructions can be found on page 4).
Logging in to OISS Portal after graduation & deactivation of your NetID
In order to access your OISS portal account using your new login credentials, you must click on the Log in with OISS Portal Account (rather than Login with NetID).

 Filing and paying U.S. TaxesWhile on OPT, you are subject to all applicable federal, state and local taxes and must file taxes. See more information on the OISS webpage about U.S. Taxes.Traveling while on OPTRemember that your status is still F-1 while on OPT. If you travel abroad while on OPT, you must have the following to re-enter the U.S.:
Valid EAD card. This means you may not be granted re-entry to the U.S. until your OPT is approved and you have your physical EAD card.  Please discuss your travel plans with your OISS advisor, especially if you plan to travel after graduation.
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old). Need a new travel signature?  Request an I-20 reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
Current passport
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
IMPORTANT NOTE: 
If you do not apply for OPT but travel outside of the U.S. after the end date listed on your I-20 during the 60-day grace-period, you will have negated your eligibility to re-enter the U.S to apply for OPT. Your only option is to file online and there are some risks. Discuss your options with your OISS advisor if this is your circumstance.OPT ResourcesApply for STEM OPT
SEVP Portal
SEVP Portal Login page
OISS Portal - Login Guide for Alumni
OISS Portal -  User Guide for AlumniExtensions of OPT24 Month STEM OPT ExtensionStudents who have received a U.S. Bachelor’s, Master’s, or Doctoral degree in a STEM field (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) may be eligible to apply for a 24 Month STEM Extension of post-completion OPT (for a total eligibility of up to 36 months of OPT). You must apply for the STEM Extension before the end date of your EAD card.
Learn more:Apply for STEM OPTCap-Gap extension for future H-1B employees"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Options after OPT EndsYou are allowed a 60-day grace period following your OPT end date to leave the United States, change your immigration status, transfer your F-1 record to a new school,l or begin a new program at NU. You may want to pursue these options before the end of your OPT. If you remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without transferring to a new school, beginning your new program, or having applied for a timely filed Change of Status, you may begin accruing days of Unlawful Presence, which has serious consequences depending on the length of the overstay. Read more about each of the options:60-day grace period to leave the United StatesIf your plan is to depart the United States after OPT, you must do so within your 60-day grace period. You must stop working by the end date (card expires date) on your EAD card.
If you are leaving the United States permanently before the end date on your EAD, you must report this via the "Early Departure Notification" in the OISS Portal so OISS can complete your SEVIS record and F status. Changing immigration statusDuring OPT
If you are approved for a change of visa status during your OPT, you must report this to the OISS by submitting a "Report Change of Status" request in the OISS Portal so we can update your SEVIS record.
After OPT
If you have a pending change of status after your OPT ends, check with the immigration legal counsel working on your change of status application to determine what options are available to you and if you may remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without a negative impact to your immigration status
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
If you have a pending or approved change of status to H-1B, you may be eligible for a Cap-Gap Extension I-20. Please consult with your OISS advisor to determine your eligibility for issuance of an I-20 reflecting this extension.Pursuing a new program of study in the U.S.During OPT
If you wish to start a new full-time academic program while on OPT, the remainder of the OPT must be forfeited before beginning classes with the new program.
If you are beginning a program of study at another U.S. school, you must request a "Transfer Out" in order to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school.
If you are beginning a new program of study at Northwestern University, you must submit a "Change of Level" request at the OISS Portal.

After OPT
If you are planning to go back to school after your OPT, you will need to submit either a "Transfer Out" request to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school or request a "Change of Level I-20" if returning to Northwestern University.  Both of these requests are submitted via the OISS Portal. The "Tranfer-Out" or "Change of Level" request must be completed before the end of the 60-day grace period following the OPT end date.
Students should keep in mind the following points when deciding on when to request a Transfer Out of their SEVIS record:
After the SEVIS transfer release date has passed, students may not continue working on OPT, even if the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) has not expired. The transfer release date, in effect, cancels the EAD.
The SEVIS transfer release date can be within the OPT period dates listed on the EAD or up to 60 days after the expiration date on the EAD.
Classes at the new school must begin within 5 months of the transfer release date or at the start of the next available term, whichever is earlier.
Students may request a transfer release date in the future and continue working on OPT until that date as long as the EAD has not expired, and the new program of study has not yet begun.
If the length of time between the OPT end date and the start date of classes at the new school will be more than five months, please meet with your OISS Advisor to discuss your options.
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on OPT
While on OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to :
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Employment and Unemployment on OPTDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment. There are limits to what jobs count as employment and to the number of days you may remain unemployed.When can I start working?On the start date of your approved EAD card. You must physically have the EAD card to start working. If your OPT approval or EAD card is delayed or lost, contact your OISS advisor to discuss your work options.What counts as "employment" while I am on OPT?Employment must be:
a job that is directly related to the student’s major area of study; if the relationship between the job and a student's field of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship.
at least 20 hours per week; if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student’s 90 days of unemployment. Each job should be marked as "full-time" (at least 20 hours per week or more) or "part-time" (less than 20 hours per week).
paid or unpaid.

Students on OPT should keep all records of employment. You may be asked to provide employment records during future USCIS application processes. Per the SEVP OPT Guidance document, the types of employment allowed during post-completion OPT include (these DO NOT apply to the STEM Extension):




Paid employment

Students may work in a job related to their field of study 20 hours or more per week (if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student's 90 days of unemployment).
Multiple employers or gigs

Students may work for more than one employer, but all employment must be related to the student’s major area of study. If a student is working with gigs, students should maintain a list of all gigs, the dates and duration.



Work for hire commonly referred to as "1099 employment"

This is a type of employment where an individual performs a service based on a contractual relationship rather than an employment relationship. If requested by DHS, students must be prepared to provide evidence showing the duration of the contract periods and the name and address of the contracting company.



Work for yourself or self-employed business owner
Work for yourself or self-employed business owner

Students may start a business and be self-employed. In this situation, the student must work full-time ( 20 hours or more per week) and be able to provide proof that their work is related to their program of study at NU. The student must be able to prove that he or she has the proper business licenses and is actively engaged in a business related to the student’s degree program.



Employment through an agency

Students must be able to provide evidence showing they worked an average of over 20 hours or more per week while employed by the agency.



Unpaid employment

Students on post-completion OPT may work as volunteers or unpaid interns. The work must be 20 hours or more per week. These students must be able to provide evidence from the employer that the student worked 20 hours or more per week the period of employment.
Unemployment 90-day ruleDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment.
Students on post-completion OPT may have up to 90 days of unemployment. The 90 days start counting from your approved OPT/EAD start date (not the recommended start date nor the program end date on your I-20) and are cumulative.
If you accumulate 90 days or more of unemployment, you are in violation of your F-1 status. You are expected to leave the U.S., transfer to another school, or change your visa status before the 90th day. See Options after OPT Ends.
Students who are granted a 24-month STEM extension are given an additional 60 days of unemployment for a total of 150 days over their entire post-completion OPT and STEM OPT periods.
Approved vacation from a job does not count as "unemployment" if you are still considered an employee there.
To ensure that you do not exceed the 90 day unemployment limit while on OPT, it is necessary to secure a full-time job, which is defined by USCIS as working 20 hours or more per week. Any job that involves working 20 hours or less per week will be apply toward your 90-day unemployment limit.
How do I know if my job is related to my degree and why is this important?Federal regulations require that all employment that you engage in while on OPT be directly related to your major area of study.  As part of your OPT reporting requirements, you must provide a description demonstrating a logical connection between your regular job duties and your major area of study. Further information and sample descriptions are available on the SEVP Policy Guidance: Practical Training – Determining a Direct Relationship Between Employment and a Student’s Major Area of Study page.
If the relationship between the job and a student's major area of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship. OISS won't be able to advise you on specifically which jobs do/do not qualify as we are not experts in your field of study. If you need assistance determining the fit of a job offer, we recommend discussing this with your academic adviser, the relevant Northwestern Career Office, or others in your field.What documentation do I need to maintain during my OPT employment?It is recommended that students maintain evidence for each job:
the position held,
duration of the position (start date and end date)
the job title
contact information for the student’s supervisor or manager
description of the work

Students must always report employment changes within 10 days of any change.
While on OPT, you are required to use the SEVP Portal to keep your SEVIS record up-to-date and report certain information to maintain your F-1 status. To keep your SEVIS record updated, the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) will email you a link to create a SEVP Portal account on or close to your OPT start date. You be required to use the SEVP Portal to:
Report your employment information within 10 days of starting or stopping a job.
Report how your job relates to your major area of study with a few sentences.
Update your address within 10 days of moving.
Changing employers/ multiple employersStudents may have multiple jobs and change jobs as many times as they wish during OPT, provided that all employment is directly related to their major area of study and the work is 20 hours or more per week. No special permission is required to change employers. However, you must update your employer information in the SEVP Portal within 10 days of the change.Reporting Requirements & Other RulesImportant rules to remember while on OPT are:
You may only work from the start date of your EAD card to the end date of your EAD card.The EAD card reads:          Valid From:_________ (start date)Card Expires: __________(end date)
All employment must be related to your major area of study.
You must report all employment and address changes to the SEVP Portal within 10 days of any change.
You are limited to 90 days of unemployment during your OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.

Below you will find additional details on OPT reporting requirements and other guidelinesReport any changes in address, employer, name, or status in the U.S. within 10 daysOnce your OPT is approved and your start date has passed, SEVP will send you login information (via email)  to create a SEVP Portal account. If you do not receive this email within one week, contact your OISS advisor for help to gain access to the SEVP portal. Be sure to check your Northwestern Email (including your spam/junk folder!) for the SEVP portal account setup email.  
You must report any changes (in address, employer, name or status in the U.S.) within 10 days. All reporting must be done in the SEVP Portal. If you are unable to report changes in the SEVP Portal, the OISS Portal will allow you to report any changes in your employment or personal details by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
See the SEVP Portal resource for additional detailed information.What records do I need to keep while on OPT?It is your responsibility to keep records of your employment, paid or unpaid. You may be asked about these records in the future (for example, if you apply for an H-1B, Legal Permanent Residency or other U.S. immigration status). Examples of records to keep include offer letters, contracts, payroll records, all job start/end dates, employer names, employer addresses and number of hours per week worked.Additional guidance for OPT studentsTaking classes while on OPTWhile on OPT, your primary purpose is to maintain OPT by working.  Incidental study (classes for fun or professional development) are allowed as a supplement to your work as long as you continue to work full-time.
If you decide to return to school full-time, you will need to transfer your SEVIS Record to the new school. If returning to Northwestern University, you should submit the Change of Level request at the OISS Portal. 
Your OPT will end on the date of your SEVIS transfer and you will no longer have work authorization.Health insurance while on OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern, your NU-SHIP coverage can continue through the end of the current academic year (September-August) or you are eligible to end your coverage early. We strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT time period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage.
If you are employed full-time during OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.How do I login to the OISS Portal after I graduate and my NetID is deactivated?Upon completion of your degree, your NetID automatically expires and will be deactivated by the university within 148 days. As your NetID is used to access the OISS portal, this will cause you to lose access to your OISS portal account. To prevent this from occurring, you will need to transition to new login credentials.
The OISS will first need to convert your portal account user ID from your NetID to your email address.Once your account user ID has been converted, you will receive an email with subject line:"Northwestern Office of International Student & Scholar Services Portal Account Conversion & NewLogin Credentials"
The email will list your new user ID (your email address) and a temporary password.
The temporary password will be valid for 30 days. If you do not log in within 30 days of receiving the email, you must reset your password (see below).
Your username is your email address that is listed as your “User ID” in your “Portal Account Conversion and New Login Credentials” email. Your password is the “Temp Password” from the same email.
You will be prompted to create a new password. This new password will be used for all future logins to the OISS Portal.
If you did not login within 30 days or receiving the email with  your temporary password, please follow the directions in the OISS Portal Guide for Alumni whose NetIDs are deactivated (instructions can be found on page 4).
Logging in to OISS Portal after graduation & deactivation of your NetID
In order to access your OISS portal account using your new login credentials, you must click on the Log in with OISS Portal Account (rather than Login with NetID).

 Filing and paying U.S. TaxesWhile on OPT, you are subject to all applicable federal, state and local taxes and must file taxes. See more information on the OISS webpage about U.S. Taxes.Traveling while on OPTRemember that your status is still F-1 while on OPT. If you travel abroad while on OPT, you must have the following to re-enter the U.S.:
Valid EAD card. This means you may not be granted re-entry to the U.S. until your OPT is approved and you have your physical EAD card.  Please discuss your travel plans with your OISS advisor, especially if you plan to travel after graduation.
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old). Need a new travel signature?  Request an I-20 reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
Current passport
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
IMPORTANT NOTE: 
If you do not apply for OPT but travel outside of the U.S. after the end date listed on your I-20 during the 60-day grace-period, you will have negated your eligibility to re-enter the U.S to apply for OPT. Your only option is to file online and there are some risks. Discuss your options with your OISS advisor if this is your circumstance.OPT ResourcesApply for STEM OPT
SEVP Portal
SEVP Portal Login page
OISS Portal - Login Guide for Alumni
OISS Portal -  User Guide for AlumniExtensions of OPT24 Month STEM OPT ExtensionStudents who have received a U.S. Bachelor’s, Master’s, or Doctoral degree in a STEM field (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) may be eligible to apply for a 24 Month STEM Extension of post-completion OPT (for a total eligibility of up to 36 months of OPT). You must apply for the STEM Extension before the end date of your EAD card.
Learn more:Apply for STEM OPTCap-Gap extension for future H-1B employees"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Options after OPT EndsYou are allowed a 60-day grace period following your OPT end date to leave the United States, change your immigration status, transfer your F-1 record to a new school,l or begin a new program at NU. You may want to pursue these options before the end of your OPT. If you remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without transferring to a new school, beginning your new program, or having applied for a timely filed Change of Status, you may begin accruing days of Unlawful Presence, which has serious consequences depending on the length of the overstay. Read more about each of the options:60-day grace period to leave the United StatesIf your plan is to depart the United States after OPT, you must do so within your 60-day grace period. You must stop working by the end date (card expires date) on your EAD card.
If you are leaving the United States permanently before the end date on your EAD, you must report this via the "Early Departure Notification" in the OISS Portal so OISS can complete your SEVIS record and F status. Changing immigration statusDuring OPT
If you are approved for a change of visa status during your OPT, you must report this to the OISS by submitting a "Report Change of Status" request in the OISS Portal so we can update your SEVIS record.
After OPT
If you have a pending change of status after your OPT ends, check with the immigration legal counsel working on your change of status application to determine what options are available to you and if you may remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without a negative impact to your immigration status
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
If you have a pending or approved change of status to H-1B, you may be eligible for a Cap-Gap Extension I-20. Please consult with your OISS advisor to determine your eligibility for issuance of an I-20 reflecting this extension.Pursuing a new program of study in the U.S.During OPT
If you wish to start a new full-time academic program while on OPT, the remainder of the OPT must be forfeited before beginning classes with the new program.
If you are beginning a program of study at another U.S. school, you must request a "Transfer Out" in order to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school.
If you are beginning a new program of study at Northwestern University, you must submit a "Change of Level" request at the OISS Portal.

After OPT
If you are planning to go back to school after your OPT, you will need to submit either a "Transfer Out" request to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school or request a "Change of Level I-20" if returning to Northwestern University.  Both of these requests are submitted via the OISS Portal. The "Tranfer-Out" or "Change of Level" request must be completed before the end of the 60-day grace period following the OPT end date.
Students should keep in mind the following points when deciding on when to request a Transfer Out of their SEVIS record:
After the SEVIS transfer release date has passed, students may not continue working on OPT, even if the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) has not expired. The transfer release date, in effect, cancels the EAD.
The SEVIS transfer release date can be within the OPT period dates listed on the EAD or up to 60 days after the expiration date on the EAD.
Classes at the new school must begin within 5 months of the transfer release date or at the start of the next available term, whichever is earlier.
Students may request a transfer release date in the future and continue working on OPT until that date as long as the EAD has not expired, and the new program of study has not yet begun.
If the length of time between the OPT end date and the start date of classes at the new school will be more than five months, please meet with your OISS Advisor to discuss your options.
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on OPT
While on OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to :
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Employment and Unemployment on OPTDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment. There are limits to what jobs count as employment and to the number of days you may remain unemployed.When can I start working?On the start date of your approved EAD card. You must physically have the EAD card to start working. If your OPT approval or EAD card is delayed or lost, contact your OISS advisor to discuss your work options.What counts as "employment" while I am on OPT?Employment must be:
a job that is directly related to the student’s major area of study; if the relationship between the job and a student's field of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship.
at least 20 hours per week; if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student’s 90 days of unemployment. Each job should be marked as "full-time" (at least 20 hours per week or more) or "part-time" (less than 20 hours per week).
paid or unpaid.

Students on OPT should keep all records of employment. You may be asked to provide employment records during future USCIS application processes. Per the SEVP OPT Guidance document, the types of employment allowed during post-completion OPT include (these DO NOT apply to the STEM Extension):




Paid employment

Students may work in a job related to their field of study 20 hours or more per week (if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student's 90 days of unemployment).
Multiple employers or gigs

Students may work for more than one employer, but all employment must be related to the student’s major area of study. If a student is working with gigs, students should maintain a list of all gigs, the dates and duration.



Work for hire commonly referred to as "1099 employment"

This is a type of employment where an individual performs a service based on a contractual relationship rather than an employment relationship. If requested by DHS, students must be prepared to provide evidence showing the duration of the contract periods and the name and address of the contracting company.



Work for yourself or self-employed business owner
Work for yourself or self-employed business owner

Students may start a business and be self-employed. In this situation, the student must work full-time ( 20 hours or more per week) and be able to provide proof that their work is related to their program of study at NU. The student must be able to prove that he or she has the proper business licenses and is actively engaged in a business related to the student’s degree program.



Employment through an agency

Students must be able to provide evidence showing they worked an average of over 20 hours or more per week while employed by the agency.



Unpaid employment

Students on post-completion OPT may work as volunteers or unpaid interns. The work must be 20 hours or more per week. These students must be able to provide evidence from the employer that the student worked 20 hours or more per week the period of employment.
Unemployment 90-day ruleDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment.
Students on post-completion OPT may have up to 90 days of unemployment. The 90 days start counting from your approved OPT/EAD start date (not the recommended start date nor the program end date on your I-20) and are cumulative.
If you accumulate 90 days or more of unemployment, you are in violation of your F-1 status. You are expected to leave the U.S., transfer to another school, or change your visa status before the 90th day. See Options after OPT Ends.
Students who are granted a 24-month STEM extension are given an additional 60 days of unemployment for a total of 150 days over their entire post-completion OPT and STEM OPT periods.
Approved vacation from a job does not count as "unemployment" if you are still considered an employee there.
To ensure that you do not exceed the 90 day unemployment limit while on OPT, it is necessary to secure a full-time job, which is defined by USCIS as working 20 hours or more per week. Any job that involves working 20 hours or less per week will be apply toward your 90-day unemployment limit.
How do I know if my job is related to my degree and why is this important?Federal regulations require that all employment that you engage in while on OPT be directly related to your major area of study.  As part of your OPT reporting requirements, you must provide a description demonstrating a logical connection between your regular job duties and your major area of study. Further information and sample descriptions are available on the SEVP Policy Guidance: Practical Training – Determining a Direct Relationship Between Employment and a Student’s Major Area of Study page.
If the relationship between the job and a student's major area of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship. OISS won't be able to advise you on specifically which jobs do/do not qualify as we are not experts in your field of study. If you need assistance determining the fit of a job offer, we recommend discussing this with your academic adviser, the relevant Northwestern Career Office, or others in your field.What documentation do I need to maintain during my OPT employment?It is recommended that students maintain evidence for each job:
the position held,
duration of the position (start date and end date)
the job title
contact information for the student’s supervisor or manager
description of the work

Students must always report employment changes within 10 days of any change.
While on OPT, you are required to use the SEVP Portal to keep your SEVIS record up-to-date and report certain information to maintain your F-1 status. To keep your SEVIS record updated, the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) will email you a link to create a SEVP Portal account on or close to your OPT start date. You be required to use the SEVP Portal to:
Report your employment information within 10 days of starting or stopping a job.
Report how your job relates to your major area of study with a few sentences.
Update your address within 10 days of moving.
Changing employers/ multiple employersStudents may have multiple jobs and change jobs as many times as they wish during OPT, provided that all employment is directly related to their major area of study and the work is 20 hours or more per week. No special permission is required to change employers. However, you must update your employer information in the SEVP Portal within 10 days of the change.Reporting Requirements & Other RulesImportant rules to remember while on OPT are:
You may only work from the start date of your EAD card to the end date of your EAD card.The EAD card reads:          Valid From:_________ (start date)Card Expires: __________(end date)
All employment must be related to your major area of study.
You must report all employment and address changes to the SEVP Portal within 10 days of any change.
You are limited to 90 days of unemployment during your OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.

Below you will find additional details on OPT reporting requirements and other guidelinesReport any changes in address, employer, name, or status in the U.S. within 10 daysOnce your OPT is approved and your start date has passed, SEVP will send you login information (via email)  to create a SEVP Portal account. If you do not receive this email within one week, contact your OISS advisor for help to gain access to the SEVP portal. Be sure to check your Northwestern Email (including your spam/junk folder!) for the SEVP portal account setup email.  
You must report any changes (in address, employer, name or status in the U.S.) within 10 days. All reporting must be done in the SEVP Portal. If you are unable to report changes in the SEVP Portal, the OISS Portal will allow you to report any changes in your employment or personal details by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
See the SEVP Portal resource for additional detailed information.What records do I need to keep while on OPT?It is your responsibility to keep records of your employment, paid or unpaid. You may be asked about these records in the future (for example, if you apply for an H-1B, Legal Permanent Residency or other U.S. immigration status). Examples of records to keep include offer letters, contracts, payroll records, all job start/end dates, employer names, employer addresses and number of hours per week worked.Additional guidance for OPT studentsTaking classes while on OPTWhile on OPT, your primary purpose is to maintain OPT by working.  Incidental study (classes for fun or professional development) are allowed as a supplement to your work as long as you continue to work full-time.
If you decide to return to school full-time, you will need to transfer your SEVIS Record to the new school. If returning to Northwestern University, you should submit the Change of Level request at the OISS Portal. 
Your OPT will end on the date of your SEVIS transfer and you will no longer have work authorization.Health insurance while on OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern, your NU-SHIP coverage can continue through the end of the current academic year (September-August) or you are eligible to end your coverage early. We strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT time period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage.
If you are employed full-time during OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.How do I login to the OISS Portal after I graduate and my NetID is deactivated?Upon completion of your degree, your NetID automatically expires and will be deactivated by the university within 148 days. As your NetID is used to access the OISS portal, this will cause you to lose access to your OISS portal account. To prevent this from occurring, you will need to transition to new login credentials.
The OISS will first need to convert your portal account user ID from your NetID to your email address.Once your account user ID has been converted, you will receive an email with subject line:"Northwestern Office of International Student & Scholar Services Portal Account Conversion & NewLogin Credentials"
The email will list your new user ID (your email address) and a temporary password.
The temporary password will be valid for 30 days. If you do not log in within 30 days of receiving the email, you must reset your password (see below).
Your username is your email address that is listed as your “User ID” in your “Portal Account Conversion and New Login Credentials” email. Your password is the “Temp Password” from the same email.
You will be prompted to create a new password. This new password will be used for all future logins to the OISS Portal.
If you did not login within 30 days or receiving the email with  your temporary password, please follow the directions in the OISS Portal Guide for Alumni whose NetIDs are deactivated (instructions can be found on page 4).
Logging in to OISS Portal after graduation & deactivation of your NetID
In order to access your OISS portal account using your new login credentials, you must click on the Log in with OISS Portal Account (rather than Login with NetID).

 Filing and paying U.S. TaxesWhile on OPT, you are subject to all applicable federal, state and local taxes and must file taxes. See more information on the OISS webpage about U.S. Taxes.Traveling while on OPTRemember that your status is still F-1 while on OPT. If you travel abroad while on OPT, you must have the following to re-enter the U.S.:
Valid EAD card. This means you may not be granted re-entry to the U.S. until your OPT is approved and you have your physical EAD card.  Please discuss your travel plans with your OISS advisor, especially if you plan to travel after graduation.
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old). Need a new travel signature?  Request an I-20 reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
Current passport
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
IMPORTANT NOTE: 
If you do not apply for OPT but travel outside of the U.S. after the end date listed on your I-20 during the 60-day grace-period, you will have negated your eligibility to re-enter the U.S to apply for OPT. Your only option is to file online and there are some risks. Discuss your options with your OISS advisor if this is your circumstance.OPT ResourcesApply for STEM OPT
SEVP Portal
SEVP Portal Login page
OISS Portal - Login Guide for Alumni
OISS Portal -  User Guide for AlumniExtensions of OPT24 Month STEM OPT ExtensionStudents who have received a U.S. Bachelor’s, Master’s, or Doctoral degree in a STEM field (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) may be eligible to apply for a 24 Month STEM Extension of post-completion OPT (for a total eligibility of up to 36 months of OPT). You must apply for the STEM Extension before the end date of your EAD card.
Learn more:Apply for STEM OPTCap-Gap extension for future H-1B employees"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Options after OPT EndsYou are allowed a 60-day grace period following your OPT end date to leave the United States, change your immigration status, transfer your F-1 record to a new school,l or begin a new program at NU. You may want to pursue these options before the end of your OPT. If you remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without transferring to a new school, beginning your new program, or having applied for a timely filed Change of Status, you may begin accruing days of Unlawful Presence, which has serious consequences depending on the length of the overstay. Read more about each of the options:60-day grace period to leave the United StatesIf your plan is to depart the United States after OPT, you must do so within your 60-day grace period. You must stop working by the end date (card expires date) on your EAD card.
If you are leaving the United States permanently before the end date on your EAD, you must report this via the "Early Departure Notification" in the OISS Portal so OISS can complete your SEVIS record and F status. Changing immigration statusDuring OPT
If you are approved for a change of visa status during your OPT, you must report this to the OISS by submitting a "Report Change of Status" request in the OISS Portal so we can update your SEVIS record.
After OPT
If you have a pending change of status after your OPT ends, check with the immigration legal counsel working on your change of status application to determine what options are available to you and if you may remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without a negative impact to your immigration status
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
If you have a pending or approved change of status to H-1B, you may be eligible for a Cap-Gap Extension I-20. Please consult with your OISS advisor to determine your eligibility for issuance of an I-20 reflecting this extension.Pursuing a new program of study in the U.S.During OPT
If you wish to start a new full-time academic program while on OPT, the remainder of the OPT must be forfeited before beginning classes with the new program.
If you are beginning a program of study at another U.S. school, you must request a "Transfer Out" in order to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school.
If you are beginning a new program of study at Northwestern University, you must submit a "Change of Level" request at the OISS Portal.

After OPT
If you are planning to go back to school after your OPT, you will need to submit either a "Transfer Out" request to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school or request a "Change of Level I-20" if returning to Northwestern University.  Both of these requests are submitted via the OISS Portal. The "Tranfer-Out" or "Change of Level" request must be completed before the end of the 60-day grace period following the OPT end date.
Students should keep in mind the following points when deciding on when to request a Transfer Out of their SEVIS record:
After the SEVIS transfer release date has passed, students may not continue working on OPT, even if the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) has not expired. The transfer release date, in effect, cancels the EAD.
The SEVIS transfer release date can be within the OPT period dates listed on the EAD or up to 60 days after the expiration date on the EAD.
Classes at the new school must begin within 5 months of the transfer release date or at the start of the next available term, whichever is earlier.
Students may request a transfer release date in the future and continue working on OPT until that date as long as the EAD has not expired, and the new program of study has not yet begun.
If the length of time between the OPT end date and the start date of classes at the new school will be more than five months, please meet with your OISS Advisor to discuss your options.
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentWhile on OPT & STEM OPTWhile on OPT
While on OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with the following guidance and OPT reporting requirements. On this page you will find information related to :
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Employment and Unemployment on OPTDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment. There are limits to what jobs count as employment and to the number of days you may remain unemployed.When can I start working?On the start date of your approved EAD card. You must physically have the EAD card to start working. If your OPT approval or EAD card is delayed or lost, contact your OISS advisor to discuss your work options.What counts as "employment" while I am on OPT?Employment must be:
a job that is directly related to the student’s major area of study; if the relationship between the job and a student's field of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship.
at least 20 hours per week; if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student’s 90 days of unemployment. Each job should be marked as "full-time" (at least 20 hours per week or more) or "part-time" (less than 20 hours per week).
paid or unpaid.

Students on OPT should keep all records of employment. You may be asked to provide employment records during future USCIS application processes. Per the SEVP OPT Guidance document, the types of employment allowed during post-completion OPT include (these DO NOT apply to the STEM Extension):




Paid employment

Students may work in a job related to their field of study 20 hours or more per week (if work is less than full-time, it counts toward a student's 90 days of unemployment).
Multiple employers or gigs

Students may work for more than one employer, but all employment must be related to the student’s major area of study. If a student is working with gigs, students should maintain a list of all gigs, the dates and duration.



Work for hire commonly referred to as "1099 employment"

This is a type of employment where an individual performs a service based on a contractual relationship rather than an employment relationship. If requested by DHS, students must be prepared to provide evidence showing the duration of the contract periods and the name and address of the contracting company.



Work for yourself or self-employed business owner
Work for yourself or self-employed business owner

Students may start a business and be self-employed. In this situation, the student must work full-time ( 20 hours or more per week) and be able to provide proof that their work is related to their program of study at NU. The student must be able to prove that he or she has the proper business licenses and is actively engaged in a business related to the student’s degree program.



Employment through an agency

Students must be able to provide evidence showing they worked an average of over 20 hours or more per week while employed by the agency.



Unpaid employment

Students on post-completion OPT may work as volunteers or unpaid interns. The work must be 20 hours or more per week. These students must be able to provide evidence from the employer that the student worked 20 hours or more per week the period of employment.
Unemployment 90-day ruleDuring the period of OPT authorization, a student should be working or actively seeking employment.
Students on post-completion OPT may have up to 90 days of unemployment. The 90 days start counting from your approved OPT/EAD start date (not the recommended start date nor the program end date on your I-20) and are cumulative.
If you accumulate 90 days or more of unemployment, you are in violation of your F-1 status. You are expected to leave the U.S., transfer to another school, or change your visa status before the 90th day. See Options after OPT Ends.
Students who are granted a 24-month STEM extension are given an additional 60 days of unemployment for a total of 150 days over their entire post-completion OPT and STEM OPT periods.
Approved vacation from a job does not count as "unemployment" if you are still considered an employee there.
To ensure that you do not exceed the 90 day unemployment limit while on OPT, it is necessary to secure a full-time job, which is defined by USCIS as working 20 hours or more per week. Any job that involves working 20 hours or less per week will be apply toward your 90-day unemployment limit.
How do I know if my job is related to my degree and why is this important?Federal regulations require that all employment that you engage in while on OPT be directly related to your major area of study.  As part of your OPT reporting requirements, you must provide a description demonstrating a logical connection between your regular job duties and your major area of study. Further information and sample descriptions are available on the SEVP Policy Guidance: Practical Training – Determining a Direct Relationship Between Employment and a Student’s Major Area of Study page.
If the relationship between the job and a student's major area of study is called into question by USCIS in the future, the burden of proof is on the student to demonstrate the relationship. OISS won't be able to advise you on specifically which jobs do/do not qualify as we are not experts in your field of study. If you need assistance determining the fit of a job offer, we recommend discussing this with your academic adviser, the relevant Northwestern Career Office, or others in your field.What documentation do I need to maintain during my OPT employment?It is recommended that students maintain evidence for each job:
the position held,
duration of the position (start date and end date)
the job title
contact information for the student’s supervisor or manager
description of the work

Students must always report employment changes within 10 days of any change.
While on OPT, you are required to use the SEVP Portal to keep your SEVIS record up-to-date and report certain information to maintain your F-1 status. To keep your SEVIS record updated, the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) will email you a link to create a SEVP Portal account on or close to your OPT start date. You be required to use the SEVP Portal to:
Report your employment information within 10 days of starting or stopping a job.
Report how your job relates to your major area of study with a few sentences.
Update your address within 10 days of moving.
Changing employers/ multiple employersStudents may have multiple jobs and change jobs as many times as they wish during OPT, provided that all employment is directly related to their major area of study and the work is 20 hours or more per week. No special permission is required to change employers. However, you must update your employer information in the SEVP Portal within 10 days of the change.Reporting Requirements & Other RulesImportant rules to remember while on OPT are:
You may only work from the start date of your EAD card to the end date of your EAD card.The EAD card reads:          Valid From:_________ (start date)Card Expires: __________(end date)
All employment must be related to your major area of study.
You must report all employment and address changes to the SEVP Portal within 10 days of any change.
You are limited to 90 days of unemployment during your OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.
The travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 is valid for 6 months while on OPT.

Below you will find additional details on OPT reporting requirements and other guidelinesReport any changes in address, employer, name, or status in the U.S. within 10 daysOnce your OPT is approved and your start date has passed, SEVP will send you login information (via email)  to create a SEVP Portal account. If you do not receive this email within one week, contact your OISS advisor for help to gain access to the SEVP portal. Be sure to check your Northwestern Email (including your spam/junk folder!) for the SEVP portal account setup email.  
You must report any changes (in address, employer, name or status in the U.S.) within 10 days. All reporting must be done in the SEVP Portal. If you are unable to report changes in the SEVP Portal, the OISS Portal will allow you to report any changes in your employment or personal details by submitting the OPT/STEM OPT Employer Update request.
See the SEVP Portal resource for additional detailed information.What records do I need to keep while on OPT?It is your responsibility to keep records of your employment, paid or unpaid. You may be asked about these records in the future (for example, if you apply for an H-1B, Legal Permanent Residency or other U.S. immigration status). Examples of records to keep include offer letters, contracts, payroll records, all job start/end dates, employer names, employer addresses and number of hours per week worked.Additional guidance for OPT studentsTaking classes while on OPTWhile on OPT, your primary purpose is to maintain OPT by working.  Incidental study (classes for fun or professional development) are allowed as a supplement to your work as long as you continue to work full-time.
If you decide to return to school full-time, you will need to transfer your SEVIS Record to the new school. If returning to Northwestern University, you should submit the Change of Level request at the OISS Portal. 
Your OPT will end on the date of your SEVIS transfer and you will no longer have work authorization.Health insurance while on OPTAfter you graduate from Northwestern, your NU-SHIP coverage can continue through the end of the current academic year (September-August) or you are eligible to end your coverage early. We strongly recommend you obtain health insurance coverage for your entire OPT/STEM OPT time period. Due to the high cost of medical care in the United States, it is very risky to be inside the country without health insurance coverage.
If you are employed full-time during OPT, you might receive health insurance as a benefit of your employment. However, it is important to note that U.S. employer-issued health insurance policies often do not cover medical evacuation or repatriation, which are essential coverages for any non-citizen living in the U.S.
If you do not receive employee health insurance, we highly recommend you obtain your own health insurance. There are several companies that specialize in health insurance for international students and offer services in several languages. We recommend speaking to a representative about the plan coverage and asking any questions you may have before purchasing an insurance policy for yourself and any dependents.How do I login to the OISS Portal after I graduate and my NetID is deactivated?Upon completion of your degree, your NetID automatically expires and will be deactivated by the university within 148 days. As your NetID is used to access the OISS portal, this will cause you to lose access to your OISS portal account. To prevent this from occurring, you will need to transition to new login credentials.
The OISS will first need to convert your portal account user ID from your NetID to your email address.Once your account user ID has been converted, you will receive an email with subject line:"Northwestern Office of International Student & Scholar Services Portal Account Conversion & NewLogin Credentials"
The email will list your new user ID (your email address) and a temporary password.
The temporary password will be valid for 30 days. If you do not log in within 30 days of receiving the email, you must reset your password (see below).
Your username is your email address that is listed as your “User ID” in your “Portal Account Conversion and New Login Credentials” email. Your password is the “Temp Password” from the same email.
You will be prompted to create a new password. This new password will be used for all future logins to the OISS Portal.
If you did not login within 30 days or receiving the email with  your temporary password, please follow the directions in the OISS Portal Guide for Alumni whose NetIDs are deactivated (instructions can be found on page 4).
Logging in to OISS Portal after graduation & deactivation of your NetID
In order to access your OISS portal account using your new login credentials, you must click on the Log in with OISS Portal Account (rather than Login with NetID).

 Filing and paying U.S. TaxesWhile on OPT, you are subject to all applicable federal, state and local taxes and must file taxes. See more information on the OISS webpage about U.S. Taxes.Traveling while on OPTRemember that your status is still F-1 while on OPT. If you travel abroad while on OPT, you must have the following to re-enter the U.S.:
Valid EAD card. This means you may not be granted re-entry to the U.S. until your OPT is approved and you have your physical EAD card.  Please discuss your travel plans with your OISS advisor, especially if you plan to travel after graduation.
I-20 with travel signature (no more than 6 months old). Need a new travel signature?  Request an I-20 reprint through the OISS Portal.
Valid F-1 visa stamp (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
Current passport
Job offer letter (highly recommended, but not required)
IMPORTANT NOTE: 
If you do not apply for OPT but travel outside of the U.S. after the end date listed on your I-20 during the 60-day grace-period, you will have negated your eligibility to re-enter the U.S to apply for OPT. Your only option is to file online and there are some risks. Discuss your options with your OISS advisor if this is your circumstance.OPT ResourcesApply for STEM OPT
SEVP Portal
SEVP Portal Login page
OISS Portal - Login Guide for Alumni
OISS Portal -  User Guide for AlumniExtensions of OPT24 Month STEM OPT ExtensionStudents who have received a U.S. Bachelor’s, Master’s, or Doctoral degree in a STEM field (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) may be eligible to apply for a 24 Month STEM Extension of post-completion OPT (for a total eligibility of up to 36 months of OPT). You must apply for the STEM Extension before the end date of your EAD card.
Learn more:Apply for STEM OPTCap-Gap extension for future H-1B employees"Cap-Gap" refers to the period of time between the official end-date listed on the OPT or STEM OPT EAD card and the official start date of an H-1B filed as a Change of Status.
The cap-gap OPT extension is the period in which an eligible F-1 student's status and employment authorization under OPT is automatically extended to bridge the gap in immigration status and employment authorization between the end of F-1 status (OPT end-date) and start of H-1B status. The student must not have violated the terms or conditions of his or her F-1 status to qualify for the cap-gap extension.
To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status (cap-gap extension does not apply to Consular filed H petitions)

The cap-gap extension is added to a student’s SEVIS record as a result of a pending Change of Status application to H-1B. The end date of the OPT must be after April 1.
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit a Cap-Gap Extension request in the OISS Portal.
Travel while on cap-gap is generally permitted if these conditions are met:

The change of status request to H-1B is approved
Re-entry to the U.S. is before October 1 or the date the H-1B employment begins
The student is otherwise admissible to the US, has a valid I-20 with travel signature reflecting the cap-gap extension, and has a valid F-1 visa (Canadians are exempt from this requirement)
For more information about travel or other details during the Cap-Gap Extension, please visit this USCIS page.
 Options after OPT EndsYou are allowed a 60-day grace period following your OPT end date to leave the United States, change your immigration status, transfer your F-1 record to a new school,l or begin a new program at NU. You may want to pursue these options before the end of your OPT. If you remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without transferring to a new school, beginning your new program, or having applied for a timely filed Change of Status, you may begin accruing days of Unlawful Presence, which has serious consequences depending on the length of the overstay. Read more about each of the options:60-day grace period to leave the United StatesIf your plan is to depart the United States after OPT, you must do so within your 60-day grace period. You must stop working by the end date (card expires date) on your EAD card.
If you are leaving the United States permanently before the end date on your EAD, you must report this via the "Early Departure Notification" in the OISS Portal so OISS can complete your SEVIS record and F status. Changing immigration statusDuring OPT
If you are approved for a change of visa status during your OPT, you must report this to the OISS by submitting a "Report Change of Status" request in the OISS Portal so we can update your SEVIS record.
After OPT
If you have a pending change of status after your OPT ends, check with the immigration legal counsel working on your change of status application to determine what options are available to you and if you may remain in the U.S. past the end of your 60-day grace period without a negative impact to your immigration status
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
Pending or approved change of status to H-1B
If you have a pending or approved change of status to H-1B, you may be eligible for a Cap-Gap Extension I-20. Please consult with your OISS advisor to determine your eligibility for issuance of an I-20 reflecting this extension.Pursuing a new program of study in the U.S.During OPT
If you wish to start a new full-time academic program while on OPT, the remainder of the OPT must be forfeited before beginning classes with the new program.
If you are beginning a program of study at another U.S. school, you must request a "Transfer Out" in order to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school.
If you are beginning a new program of study at Northwestern University, you must submit a "Change of Level" request at the OISS Portal.

After OPT
If you are planning to go back to school after your OPT, you will need to submit either a "Transfer Out" request to transfer your F-1 SEVIS record to another school or request a "Change of Level I-20" if returning to Northwestern University.  Both of these requests are submitted via the OISS Portal. The "Tranfer-Out" or "Change of Level" request must be completed before the end of the 60-day grace period following the OPT end date.
Students should keep in mind the following points when deciding on when to request a Transfer Out of their SEVIS record:
After the SEVIS transfer release date has passed, students may not continue working on OPT, even if the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) has not expired. The transfer release date, in effect, cancels the EAD.
The SEVIS transfer release date can be within the OPT period dates listed on the EAD or up to 60 days after the expiration date on the EAD.
Classes at the new school must begin within 5 months of the transfer release date or at the start of the next available term, whichever is earlier.
Students may request a transfer release date in the future and continue working on OPT until that date as long as the EAD has not expired, and the new program of study has not yet begun.
If the length of time between the OPT end date and the start date of classes at the new school will be more than five months, please meet with your OISS Advisor to discuss your options.
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes and requirements as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentOPT for F-1 Students
F-1 Optional Practical Training (OPT)Optional Practical Training (OPT) is a 12-month work authorization available to F-1 international students who have been full-time students for at least one academic year and plan to seek employment in the United States in their fields of study.   Looking for information about the 24-month STEM OPT Extension? Go to the STEM OPT Extension page.The BasicsOPT is a benefit of a student’s F-1 status. Students generally apply for OPT in their last academic term.EligibilityTo be eligible for OPT, you must...

be in F-1 status at the time of OPT application.
be a full-time student for at least one academic year. 
be completing your program of study at Northwestern University.
Not have used more than 1 year of full-time CPT during your current degree level.
OPT is available once per academic level.
If you applied for OPT at the same academic level previously, but did not use your full 12 months of OPT at that time, please contact your OISS advisor to discuss your options.
Do I need a job offer before applying for OPT?No, a job offer is not required to apply for OPT. However, during the 12-month OPT period, you will be allowed only a cumulative total of 90 days of unemployment.  You must also report your employment in the SEVP Portal or the OISS Portal under the “alumni” tab. See Rules and Reporting Requirements while on OPT for more information.What visa status will I have while my OPT application is pending and while I am working on OPT?During your pending OPT application and after the OPT approval by USCIS, F-1 students will remain in F-1 status under the I-20 sponsorship of Northwestern University. OPT is a benefit of your F-1 status and extends your ability to remain in the United States for the purpose of seeking employment in your field of study. This means that you will continue to use your Northwestern University OPT I-20 and F-1 documents to travel and you will need to get travel signatures from OISS every 6 months. This also means that OISS
and you will need to get travel signatures from OISS every 6 months. This also means that OISS is still responsible for reporting changes about your status to SEVIS and helping you maintain your F-1 status while you are on OPT.Do I need an SSN (Social Security Number) to work in the U.S.? Yes, a Social Security Number (SSN) is required for any paid employment in the United States. You can apply for an SSN as part of the OPT application to USCIS, but you will not receive the SSN card until after your OPT is approved.Applying for OPTThe OPT application process involves both OISS and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) and can take 3 – 5 months. OPT applications can be rather complex. The first step is to complete the required online OISS Optional Practical Training course (see instructions below). Once you are approved for OPT, you will receive an Employment Authorization Document (EAD Card) and I-797 Approval Notice from USCIS. These documents do not necessarily
Document (EAD Card) and I-797 Approval Notice from USCIS. These documents do not necessarily arrive on the same date. This webpage provides instruction related to the online application only.
USCIS also offers a premium processing option for OPT and STEM OPT applications. The premium processing fee is an additional $1,685 and the response processing timeframe on a complete application is 30 calendar days. See USCIS Premium Processing for additional information.OISS Optional Practical Training Course (online)OISS has launched an online OPT tutorial! Starting in January 2024, all students who submit an Optional Training Training (OPT) Recommendation request in the OISS Portal must submit a copy of their Certificate of Completion from the new online OISS OPT course. Students should complete the course BEFORE beginning their application for OPT and save the certificate. The course is a comprehensive guide to applying for OPT, eligibility, and reporting requirements.How do I access the online OISS OPT course? If you already have a Homebase account (used for the online Orientation course which began in Winter 2023):
Go to: https://homebase.english3.com/#/
Enter your email address (used to create your Homebase account) and password.
If you can’t remember your password, click on “forgot password” and follow the instructions to reset your password.
Click on “My Courses” at the right top of your screen,
Then click “Add Course” at the bottom of this page.
For “Organization” select “Northwestern University”
For “Access Code” enter NUOPT and click search.
Begin the Optional Practical Training course.
If you have any issues accessing the course, please email: intoff@northwestern.edu

If you are a new user to Homebase, create your Homebase account & access the OPT course:
If you are a new user to Homebase, create your Homebase account & access the OPT course: 

Go to: https://checkout.english3.com/homebase/register/
Select Institution:    Northwestern University
Enter the Access Code:   NUOPT
Enter the rest of your information and set a password. Make note of the email used and the password you set so that you can return to Homebase as needed.
Click on the "My Courses" tab on the top right
Begin the Optional Practical Training course.
If you have any issues accessing the course, please email: intoff@northwestern.edu
When to Apply
You can apply for OPT up to 90 days before and up to 60 days after the program end date on your Form I-20. If USCIS receives your application more than 90 days before your I-20 program end date or more than 60 days after your I-20 program end date, it will be rejected.Refer to the chart below for upcoming dates:
Term
Program End Date
Apply for OPT 90 days before program end date(Earliest date USCIS will receive application)
EarliestOPT Start Date
Latest OPT Start Date  (End date of grace period & last date USCIS will accept OPT application)


Winter Quarter 2024
03/16/2024
12/17/2023
03/17/2024
05/15/2024


Spring Semester (Law) 2024
05/02/2024
02/02/2024
05/03/2024
07/01/2024


Spring Quarter 2024
06/08/2024
03/10/2024
06/09/2024
08/07/2024


Summer Quarter 2024
08/24/2024
05/26/2024
08/25/2024
10/23/2024


Fall Quarter 2024
12/14/2024
09/15/2024
12/15/2024
02/12/2025


Fall Semester (Law) 2024
12/19/2024
09/20/2024
12/20/2024
02/17/2025
All OPT applicants must first obtain an OPT recommendation on a new I-20 (the OPT I-20). Before applying, submit your OPT Request at the OISS Portal. Students can submit their OPT Request in the OISS Portal up to 100 days before their I-20 program end date.
If USCIS receives your application more than 90 days before your I-20 program end date or more than 60 days after your I-20 program end date, your application will be denied. Due to this, OISS will not process your OPT Recommendation request until the 90 day deadline has been reached or passed.
The program end date on your I-20 matches your final term of enrollment (excluding some PhD students). If you finish your program earlier than your I-20 end date, the OISS will shorten your I-20 end date to the final date of the term you are applying for OPT based on your OPT Request.
USCIS must receive your full and complete OPT application no more than 60 days after your expected program completion date (end date on your I-20).
Your OPT application will be denied if it is received by USCIS more than 30 days after the recommendation for OPT is entered into SEVIS. In order to avoid a denial, we highly suggest that you submit your application to USCIS within 15 days.
If it is close to the 30 day timeline and you have not submitted your application to USCIS, do not send your I-765 to USCIS and instead request a new OPT I-20 through the OISS Portal by submitting the “Optional Practical Training (OPT): Past 30 Days OR Change Recommended Dates” request via the OISS Portal.
How to Apply
Complete your "Optional Practical Training (OPT) Recommendation" request via the OISS Portal. The OPT Request requires two important components:  1) The Certificate of Completion of the online OISS OPT course (see instructions above) and 2) The recommendation for OPT that will need to be completed by your academic advisor, PI, or director of graduate studies.
You will need to provide the full name and email address of your academic advisor, PI or director of graduate studies providing your recommendation in the OPT request. OISS advisors are not your “recommender” in the OPT Request on the OISS Portal.
The OPT recommendation will be sent to your academic advisor, PI or director of graduate studies via email. The academic advisor certifies:

You have completed all your course requirements.
You are going to graduate in the term you have indicated on your OPT request. Please note, PhD students must be ABD before applying for OPT.
You are in good academic standing.


You should discuss this request with your academic advisor (not OISS advisor) before completing the request in the portal. We cannot process the OPT request until the electronic recommendation from your academic advisor has been received.
Your OISS Advisor will review your request for OPT. If you are eligible for OPT, you will be issued an updated I-20 with OPT Recommendation to submit with your OPT application. After the OISS receives your electronic recommendation, please allow 5 business days for the OISS to process your updated I-20 with your OPT Recommendation on page 2. See image from page 2 of example I-20 with OPT recommendation:
Prepare OPT Application Materials: While waiting for your new I-20 with your OPT Recommendation, prepare your OPT application documents and digital photos as outlined under Step 1 of the Online I-765 Application for OPT. 
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with OPT Recommendation:
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with OPT Recommendation: 
You will receive an email notifying you when your updated I-20 with OPT recommendation has been processed and is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. You will then be able to print your updated I-20 with OPT recommendation from your “Documents” section of the OISS Portal. You will need to sign in ink in the student attestation section of the document. This is the easiest and fastest way to receive your I-20.
Review all your documents carefully before sending or submitting your OPT application: Check your major and degree level on page 1 of your I-20 and check your OPT recommendation on page 2 of your I-20. 

You are responsible for your OPT application and we recommend that you independently check dates, deadlines, addresses and the I-765 instructions We recommend you photocopy and/or save an electronic copy of your FULL application.


File your COMPLETE application with USCIS within 30 days of the date the OISS processed your OPT request. The OPT recommendation on the OPT I-20 is only valid for 30 days. OISS recommends you submit your complete OPT application within 15 days of the date your advisor recommends you for OPT on the I-20.
IMPORTANT: The application MUST be received by USCIS within 30 days of OISS recommending OPT in your SEVIS record and issuing your OPT I-20 or OPT will be denied. If it has been more than 30 days since your OPT I-20 was issued and you have not sent or submitted your application, please submit a new OPT request at the OISS Portal and email your OISS advisor. Application Materials ChecklistThe online I-765 application is available ONLY for F-1 students applying for Post Completion OPT or the STEM Extension of OPT. The online I-765 cannot be used for any other type of employment authorization application. Be sure to check your application for any errors before submitting.
See the following links for detailed instructions for filing the I-765 online application:
Online I-765 Application for Post-Completion OPT
Online I-765 Application for STEM OPT Extension
Avoid Form I-765 DelaysReview the CIS Ombudsman tip sheet on How F-1 Students Seeking Optional Practical Training Can Avoid Form I-765 Delays.FAQs about the OPT Application ProcessWhat is the OPT filing fee?The OPT filing fee as of October 2023 is $410. Please check USCIS Filing Fees to verify the correct current fee amount.
Once you are ready to submit your form I-765 online, the system will automatically direct you to the secure Department of Treasury site, pay.gov, to pay your fees online. USCIS only uses pay.gov to process fees. Always check the website address before you pay. Beware of scam websites and scammers who may pretend to be a USCIS website.What are the requirements for the photos?OISS strongly recommends students applying for OPT use a professional visa/passport photo service (such as the photo department at Walgreens or CVS) to ensure the photo meets all requirements for the OPT application. We are aware of numerous circumstances in which students initially received approval utilizing the online photo tool, and later had their OPT application rejected due to issues with the photo. The acceptance of your digital image or photo is at the discretion of USCIS.
The digital photo requirements for filing online are different from the paper photo requirements for filing a paper application by mail. See requirements below.
Digital photo requirements for filing your OPT application ONLINE:

You must prepare a digital passport-style photo taken within the last 30 days and the photo must follow the U.S. Department of State guidelines. Please review the following resources:
Photo Requirements
Photo Composition Template.
Be sure to check that your photo file has an acceptable name that follows USCIS's file name formatting outlined in the instructions and is saved as either a .jpeg / .jpg or .png file type. The online OPT application has a photo tool you can use to check your photo. 



How do I choose my OPT start date?As part of the OPT I-20 request process, you must request an OPT start date. This is the day on which you would like to start working while on OPT. Some things to consider when choosing your requested OPT start date:
The requested start date must be within 60 days of your program end date on your I-20. It can be as early as the day after your end date and up to 60 days after that.
It is not guaranteed that you will be approved for the start date you request. Your approved start date will appear on your Employment Authorization Document, or EAD card and may be later than your requested start date. Please note that you may not begin working until your approved EAD start date, regardless of the requested date on your I-20.
Do you have travel plans? If you plan to travel, especially internationally, you may not want to select a start date during your planned travel time.
If you have a job offer, discuss with your employer an appropriate start date based on when you have applied for your OPT (consider the 3-to-5-month processing time).
If you don't have a job offer, you should consider where you are in your job search and when jobs typically start in your field and make your best estimate of when you'd like to begin working.
Days of unemployment only begin after the approved start date listed on your EAD.
Weigh the pros and cons of an early vs. late start date. If you choose an earlier start date, you may be able to begin your employment earlier, BUT if you don't find a job, you will begin accruing unemployment days sooner. If you choose a later start date, your unemployment days will begin accruing later, BUT you'll have to wait longer to begin employment.
What is the usual processing time?The average USCIS processing time to issue the OPT Employment Authorization Document (EAD) is 3 to 5 months.
USCIS also now offers premium processing for OPT and STEM OPT Applications. The timeline for premium processing is 30 calendar days and requires you to file a Form I-907 in addition to the I-765 There is an additional fee of $1,685 for premium processing, which is in addition to the I-765 application fee. Read more about USCIS premium processing.What if I forgot to submit my OPT application to USCIS within the 30-day deadline?If OISS recommended you for OPT more than 30 days ago and you have not yet submitted your application to USCIS, you'll need a new OPT I-20 from OISS.
If you are still within your 60-day grace period and otherwise eligible to apply for OPT, submit another OPT Request in the OISS portal. This request is titled the OPT: Past 30 Days or Change Recommendation Dates. 
Do not send in an application if more than 30 days have passed. Your application will be rejected.
What if I applied for OPT, but did not complete my degree program as planned?Please contact your OISS Advisor as soon as possible to discuss your situation.While You Wait for Your OPT EAD CardTo verify the current average OPT processing time with USCIS, check the I-765 USCIS processing times.What to expect after submitting your OPT application to USCISUpon submission of your application: You will receive a confirmation that your Form I-765 was successfully submitted. Following the completion of your online filing, you should be able to review your I-765 receipt notice in your online myUSCIS account and track the status of the application.
Within 4 - 6 weeks: You will receive an I-797c receipt notice at your mailing address confirming the date of receipt and your receipt number. Keep this notice safe as it is your official proof that your OPT application was submitted. If there are any errors in the receipt notice in your name, address, or application type, contact your OISS adviser right away.
Around 3 – 5 months: You should receive an I-797 Notice of Approval letter and EAD card at your mailing address. These items may arrive separately or at the same time. Check your EAD card to make sure all information is correct. You can start working on your EAD start date! If there are any errors on the EAD, contact your OISS adviser right away.
Around 2 Weeks after receiving EAD card: You should receive your Social Security Card (if you requested one).Can I work on or off campus while waiting for my Employment Authorization Document (EAD)?While waiting for your EAD card to arrive…..
And until the program end date on your I-20, you can continue working ON CAMPUS. You may also continue to work on pre-approved CPT.
After your I-20 program end date, you cannot work anywhere until you have your physical EAD card in your possession; you may begin working on the first day listed in the “valid from” section of your EAD.
Travel Outside the U.S. While OPT is PendingTravel during the OPT application process is allowed, but not recommended as it poses certain risks.
Consider the following:
You should include a different mailing address than your own with an “in care of” person designated in your I-765 if you plan international travel while your OPT is pending. The mail systems in Chicago area apartment buildings can be challenging and it is not guaranteed you will receive mail when you are not there.
If you receive a Request for Evidence, you will need to respond by a certain deadline and all mail to USCIS must be sent from within the U.S.
If you are denied for OPT while outside the United States, you will not be able to re-enter the U.S to reapply. If you are within your 60-day grace period when your denial is received, your only option is to refile online.
If you are approved for OPT while outside the United States, you will need to arrange for your EAD card to be sent to you abroad to re-enter the United States. USCIS only sends EAD cards to U.S. addresses and your name or your “in care of” designee’s name must be on the mailbox.
If your F-1 visa is expired, you will need to reapply for an F-1 visa with your EAD card and I-20.
If you choose to travel while your application is pending, be sure that you are monitoring your mail.  
Problems With Your OPT ApplicationThere are several types of problems that may occur during your OPT application:
Delayed processing
Not receiving your I-797c Receipt Notice
Request for Evidence or Denial
Incorrect EAD
If there is any problem with your OPT application, contact your OISS Advisor right away so we can provide guidance on your situation. If you do not receive your EAD card because it is undeliverable or lost in the mail, refer to our Replacement EAD Card webpage.When your EAD arrivesUpon receiving your Employment Authorization Document (EAD), check the following:1.     Verify Personal Information
Ensure your name is spelled correctly and matches the name on your Form I-20.
Confirm the accuracy of your date of birth, country of birth, and sex.
2.	Review Work Authorization Dates:
Check the start and end dates for which you are authorized to work.
3.	Confirm the Correct Category:
For Post-Completion OPT, the category should be CO3B.
For STEM OPT Extension, the category should be CO3C.
4.     If  your EAD card contains incorrect information due to a USCIS error:
You must return the original EAD card to USCIS to get it corrected. See Replacement EAD Card for instructions.
If you are not sure if the error was made by USCIS or if you have questions, please contact your OISS Advisor.
While on OPTConsult the While on OPT resource for important information related to rules and reporting requirements, practical matters, definitions of employment and unemployment, accessing and using the SEVP Portal, and much more.What do I need to understand while on OPT?The Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved OPT (Optional Practical Training). As an F-1 student on OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Therefore, it is important that OPT students are familiar with and follow OPT reporting requirements.
Employment and unemployment while on OPT
Rules & reporting requirements
Practical matters while on OPT (health insurance, traveling , taxes, accessing the OISS Portal after graduation, etc)
Extensions of OPT
Options after OPT ends
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility
may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentOPT for F-1 StudentsOnline Application for Post-Completion OPT 
Online I-765 Application for Post-Completion OPT In addition to the paper version of Form I-765, USCIS is now accepting online Form I-765 applications for Optional Practical Training (OPT) and the 24-month OPT STEM Extension. The online I-765 application is available ONLY for F-1 students applying for Post Completion OPT or the STEM Extension of OPT. The online I-765 cannot be used for any other type of employment authorization application.
The instructions included here are specific to individuals applying online for Post Completion OPT only. If you are applying for STEM OPT Extension, please see Online I-765 Application for STEM OPT Extension.
Please keep in mind that the online application method is new. As with any new system, there may be unanticipated questions or processing issues. USCIS predicts that I-765 processing times for online applications will be about the same as processing times for paper applications. However, applying online will let you receive immediate confirmation that your application was received.
You are required to first submit your OPT or STEM OPT request at the OISS Portal to receive your new I-20 first. You should also plan to attend an OPT workshop to understand everything about OPT before applying. Check the OISS Calendar for upcoming OPT workshops.Read First: Understanding the Online I-765 Application Process for Post-Completion OPTThe online version of the I-765 application will ask you similar questions and require you to submit the same information as the paper version of Form I-765. Here is a process overview:
First, submit your OPT request in the OISS Portal to obtain your OPT I-20 with your OPT recommendation.
You will use an email address to create your own personal USCIS account through the myUSCIS
Once you log into the myUSCIS portal, you will be able to start and complete an online I-765 application form.

You should not submit the online I-765 application until after obtaining and uploading your I-20 with OPT recommendation. To receive your OPT I-20, submit the OPT request at the OISS Portal.See example below of page 2 Form I-20 with OPT recommendation:
You will have the ability to save and return to the I-765 application at later times, but you will need to make an edit at least every 30 days or your form progress will reset, and you will need to start over.
In addition to answering questions, you will be required to upload digital copies of required photos and documents, including a digital passport photo and digital copies of your OPT I-20), passport identification page, past Employment Authorization (EAD) cards, and other required documents.
You will sign your online application electronically.
You will submit an electronic payment of the required I-765 application fee by authorizing a direct withdrawal from your U.S. bank account or U.S. credit or debit card.
Once your application fee is paid and your application is officially submitted to USCIS, you will automatically receive an electronic receipt number, as well as options to track your application or submit additional information if requested by USCIS. You will be able to download your receipt notice upon submission as well.
Once you submit your payment information and that payment is successfully received, USCIS considers your application OFFICIALLY SUBMITTED, and you cannot go back to edit or change information.
Please NoteWhether applying online or by paper, you should keep in mind that the I-765 application is your personal application for employment authorization. You are responsible for following all USCIS instructions and making sure that the application is correct and complete. Northwestern University and NU’s OISS will NOT have access to your application and cannot correct, edit, or change any information on your application for you. If you have any issues or questions regarding your I-765 application, you will need to work directly with USCIS. OISS advisors can provide some guidance and help if you do need to contact USCIS; we encourage you to communicate with OISS for assistance.Step 1: Prepare Your DocumentsWhen you submit the online I-765 application for Post-Completion OPT, you will need to prepare to enter the following information and upload the following documents. You will enter information and upload photos and documents into myUSCIS once you start your application.
Please review the Online OPT Application Checklist for a list of documents we recommend you include in your online OPT application.Prepare Your Digital PhotosYou must prepare a digital passport-style photo taken within the last thirty days and the photo must follow the U.S. Department of State Photo Composition Template.
OISS strongly recommends students applying for OPT use a professional visa/passport photo service (such as the photo department at Walgreens or CVS) to ensure the photo meets all requirements for the OPT application. We are aware of numerous circumstances in which students initially received approval utilizing the online photo tool, and later had their OPT application rejected due to issues with the photo. The acceptance of your digital image or photo is at the discretion of USCIS.
Be sure to check that your photo file has an acceptable name that follows USCIS's file name formatting outlined in the instructions and is saved as either a .jpeg / .jpg or .png file type. The online OPT application has a photo tool you can use to check your photo.Prepare Digital Copies of Required DocumentsSave all documents as .pdf or .jpeg documents and follow USCIS's requirements for file names using English letters, numbers, spaces, periods, hyphens, underscores, and parentheses only.
Your OPT I-20 

First, you must submit the OPT request at the OISS Portal to receive a new I-20 with your OPT recommendation
Be sure to sign and date your new OPT recommendation I-20 in ink at the bottom of page 1, in the "Student Attestation" section.
Confirm your I-20 has your OPT recommendation on page 2


Any I-20s with CPT authorization or previous OPT authorization, if applicable.
Passport identification page (submit as government-issued ID)
Any previously issued Employment Authorization Documents (EAD) cards, if applicable
Form I-94 arrival record - retrieve your most recent I-94 record and save as a .pdf
Step 2: Create Your myUSCIS AccountCreate a myUSCIS Account on uscis.gov
Set up your myUSCIS account by going to uscis.gov and selecting "Sign In" --> "Create Account"
You can also create an account from the main USCIS home page at https://www.uscis.gov --> "Sign up”
Another option is to go to the File Online section of the USCIS web site and clicking on the "Create an Account or Sign In" box
You must use your e-mail to create your myUSCIS account.
The system will send you a one-time PIN to log into your account; you will need to continue to use two-factor authentication when signing-in to your account.
Follow all other USCIS instructions to finalize the account creation process.
Keep your account information secure as you will need to return to your account to finish the application and to view updates once you have submitted your application.
Review USCIS's TipsOnce you create your myUSCIS account, read through USCIS's Tips for Filing Forms Online page. After you have reviewed the information, start your online I-765 application (next step).Step 3: Prepare and Submit Your Online I-765 Application for Post-Completion OPTImportant Notes on TimingYou will be able to save and return to the application at a later time and date, but OISS recommends you complete all application steps and submit your application within 15 days of your OPT I-20 issuance date.
You must file your COMPLETE application within 30 days of the date the OISS processed your OPT request (date on new I-20 with OPT recommendation).
If more than 30 days have passed since your OPT I-20 was issued and you have not submitted your application, you will need to submit a new OPT request at the OISS Portal and email your OISS advisor.
 Start Your Online Form I-765 Application for Post-Completion OPTRemember to first submit your OPT request in the OISS Portal to receive your new I-20 with OPT recommendation.
Once you have created and logged-in to your myUSCIS account, follow these steps to file your online I-765 application. Be sure to review the Online OPT Application Checklist before submitting your application.
Look for the option to "File a Form Online"
Look for the option to file Form I-765 (toward the bottom) - be sure to select the correct form!
Once you have selected Form I-765, you will be prompted to start the online I-765 application
You should make an edit to you online application every 30 days or your form progress will reset, and you will need to start over.
Completing the Online I-765 for Post-Completion OPTSection 1: “Getting Started”

Basis of eligibility: select the correct eligibility code

(c)(3)(A) for pre-completion Optional Practical Training (rare)
(c)(3)(B) for post-completion Optional Practical Training (most common - for employment following graduation)
(c)(3)(C) for the 24-month STEM Extension of OPT (after post-completion OPT for STEM Designated Programs)


Reason for applying:

For post-completion OPT for your first time at this academic level, select “initial permission to accept employment”



Section 2: “About You”

Your name:
Section 2: “About You”

Your name:

Include any names you have identified as currently or in the past


Your contact information:

Current mailing address: this should be a valid address where you can receive your OPT application materials including the mailed paper receipt notice, approval notice, and EAD card. This should be an address where you can receive mail for approximately 6 months into the future in case of application processing delays.

If you will move from your current apartment or travel internationally earlier than 6 months into the future, it is recommended you include a friend or family member’s address in your I-765. Put their name in the “in care of” field.
You can also obtain a Post Office Box to receive your mail from USCIS.
Mail from USCIS will come from the U.S. Postal Service, or USPS. You can sign up for informed delivery to receive notifications about mail you receive.
If you include a friend or family member’s address, select “no” to the question is your current mailing address the same as your physical address?
Under “where in the United States do you live” enter your current address even if you will move during your OPT application process.


Other information: F-1 students generally do not have an A-number or a USCIS online account number

Section 3: “Evidence”
To complete the online I-765 form, you will need to upload required documents and evidence.

“2 x 2 photo of you”: follow the guidelines outlined in this section and use the resources provided to ensure your photo is acceptable

Photo must follow the US Department of State Photo Composition Template


“Form I-94”: Your I-94 entry record
“Employment Authorization Document”: Upload your passport biographical page here
If you have previously applied for OPT, a copy of your previous EAD card(s).
If you do not have your previous EAD card, you can upload your approval notice or receipt notice for that period of OPT with a statement explaining your EAD card was lost, your OPT dates, and your program information.


“Previously Authorized CPT or OPT”: Any I-20s with a CPT authorization from any degree level or U.S. based institution

If you do not have your CPT I-20s, contact your advisor for a CPT print out for periods of CPT at Northwestern. If you do not have CPT I-20s from a previous school, write a statement outlining your CPT dates and the program information at that time. You can upload the statement in this section


“Form I-20”: Most recent I-20 with post-completion OPT recommendation
“Form I-20”: Most recent I-20 with post-completion OPT recommendation

Request a new I-20 with an OPT recommendation at the OISS Portal.
Your OPT recommendation at the top of page 2 of your I-20. Be sure to check this recommendation as soon as you receive your new OPT I-20.
Be sure to print, sign (in ink) and then scan your I-20 before you upload it
This I-20 must be uploaded and your complete I-765 application submitted to USCIS within 30 days from the OPT I-20 issue date.


Any other evidence relevant to your application and your particular circumstances.

Section 4: “Additional Information”
This section is to provide additional explanation or information for your responses in your I-765 or for your uploaded evidence. This section does not allow for uploads.
In this section you can include additional information such as:
Previous SEVIS ID #s or previous academic studies (Section: About You; Page: Your immigration information; Question: What is your SEVIS number?)
If you have missing I-20s for previously authorized CPT or OPT, include those details (Section: Evidence, Page: Form I-20, Question: I-20 Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant Student Status)
If you have multiple citizenships and uploaded different passport biographical pages, this is a good place to include the explanation of your dual citizenship while emphasizing which citizenship was used to obtain your F-1 status. (Section: Evidence, Page: Form I-20, Question: I-20 Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant Student Status)
If your I-20 is less than 1 academic year but you otherwise qualify for OPT, include an explanation that you have attended an SEVP certified school for one academic year if you began your program remotely but otherwise qualify for OPT (Section: Evidence, Page: Form I-20, Question: I-20 Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant Student Status). In this case, we also suggest including a copy of your transcript under “unsolicited information”
Section 5: “Review and Submit”
MyUSCIS will review your application for accuracy and completeness. Correct any errors under the “alerts and warnings” section. If there are no alerts or warnings, your application has been checked for completeness. There is an option to print this page or save your draft I-765 as a .pdf file. NU OISS encourages you to save your draft before submitting.
Submit Payment

Once your application is complete, the system will direct you to Pay.gov, a US government payment site, to pay the required I-765 application fee.
There, you will be able to pay the application fee using a US credit / debit card or through an ACH transfer (direct withdrawal) from your US checking account.

If you pay by direct withdrawal, you will need to provide your bank account number and your bank's ABA routing number
Look at a copy of a bank check or bank statement from your account for your account number and your bank's ABA routing number or contact your bank for assistance.
IMPORTANT: Once you submit your payment information and that payment is successfully received, USCIS considers your application OFFICIALLY SUBMITTED.

You cannot change or edit your I-765 application responses after payment has been submitted.
The fee is non-refundable once payment has been made.


Once your application is submitted, your application will automatically be assigned a USCIS receipt number.

You can print out an electronic receipt from your myUSCIS portal.
A paper receipt will follow in the mail a few weeks after the electronic submission



Do NOT submit your online OPT application without your OPT I-20 with your OPT recommendation. You request this I-20 by submitting the OPT Request at the OISS Portal.Step 4: Monitor Your Account for Updates and Follow-upMonitor Your myUSCIS PortalAfter you have submitted your OPT application, you are responsible for monitoring your USCIS account for messages and updates. Through your account, you should be able to:
print an electronic receipt (a paper receipt will also be mailed to you)
send additional information, in case you receive a request for additional evidence (RFE) from USCIS
print a PDF version of your application for your records
It is recommended that you notify your OISS Advisor if USCIS requests any additional information regarding your case, so that we can help to advise you on your options. However, you will have the option of communicating directly with USCIS regarding your case and submitting responses to any requests for additional evidence or information.Biometrics AppointmentIn most cases, F-1 students will NOT be required to schedule a biometrics appointment with USCIS as a part of the I-765 application process. A biometrics appointment involves appearing at a USCIS Application Support Center to have your photographs, fingerprints, and signature taken. If you are asked to do a biometrics appointment, you will receive a notice from USCIS to schedule an appointment.Change of U.S. AddressWhile your OPT is processing, it is recommended you do not change your mailing address. If you believe you will move during your OPT application process, please use a friend or family member’s address as your mailing
during your OPT application process, please use a friend or family member’s address as your mailing address.
If you need to change your US address and need to have your EAD sent to another US mailing address, you should update your address information in your USCIS account portal by following the change of address instructions on USCIS's Tips for Filing Forms Online page.
Remember, it is a requirement of your F-1 status to make address updates within 10 days of any change. Once your OPT is approved, you can make address updates at the SEVP Portal. If you need to update your address while your OPT is pending, email your OISS Advisor with your new address.If you have any doubts or questions…OISS Advisors offer general guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM Extension processes as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
You can schedule an appointment with your OISS advisor or send them an email with specific questions.Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility
may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentSTEM OPT for F1 StudentsOnline Application for the STEM OPT Extension 
Online I-765 Application for the STEM OPT Extension In addition to the paper version of Form I-765, USCIS is now accepting online Form I-765 applications for Optional Practical Training (OPT) and the 24-month OPT STEM Extension. The online I-765 application is available ONLY for F-1 students applying for OPT or the STEM Extension of OPT. The online I-765 cannot be used for any other type of employment authorization application.
The instructions included here are specific to individuals applying online for the 24-month STEM OPT Extension.
Please keep in mind that the online application method is new. As with any new system, there may be unanticipated questions or processing issues. USCIS predicts that I-765 processing times for online applications will be about the same as processing times for paper applications. However, applying online will let you receive immediate confirmation that your application was received.
You are required to first submit your STEM OPT request at the OISS portal to receive your new I-20 first. You can apply for the STEM OPT extension online if you are currently on post-completion OPTRead First: Understanding the Online I-765 Application Process for STEM OPT The online version of the I-765 application will ask you similar questions and require you to submit the same information as the paper version of Form I-765. Here is a process overview:
First, submit your STEM OPT Extension request in the OISS Portal to obtain your OPT I-20 with your OPT recommendation. 
PLEASE NOTE:The STEM OPT Extension Request will appear as an option in the OISS Portal ONLY if both of the following eligibility conditions are met:

You have completed a degree listed in the STEM Designated Degree Program List
It is 100 days or less from the end date of your Post-Completion OPT


You will use an email address to create your own personal USCIS account through the myUSCIS
Once you log into the myUSCIS portal, you will be able to start and complete an online I-765 application form.

You should not submit the online I-765 application until after obtaining and uploading your I-20 with STEM OPT recommendation. To receive your STEM OPT I-20, submit the STEM OPT request at the OISS Portal.
You will have the ability to save and return to the I-765 application at later times, but you will need to make an edit at least every 30 days or your form progress will reset, and you will need to start over.
In addition to answering questions, you will be required to upload digital copies of required photos and documents, including a digital passport photo and digital copies, OPT STEM Extension I-20, passport identification page, past Employment Authorization (EAD) cards, and other required documents.
You will sign your online application electronically.
You will submit an electronic payment of the required I-765 application fee by authorizing a direct withdrawal from your U.S. bank account or U.S. credit or debit card.
Once your application fee is paid and your application is officially submitted to USCIS, you will automatically receive an electronic receipt number, as well as options to track your application or submit additional information if requested by USCIS. You will be able to download your receipt notice upon submission as well.
Once you submit your payment information and that payment is successfully received, USCIS considers your application OFFICIALLY SUBMITTED, and you cannot go back to edit or change information.
Please NoteWhether applying online or by paper, you should keep in mind that the I-765 application is your personal application for employment authorization. You are responsible for following all USCIS instructions and making sure that the application is correct and complete. Northwestern University and NU’s OISS will NOT have access to your application and cannot correct, edit, or change any information on your application for you. If you have any issues or questions regarding your I-765 application, you will need to work directly with USCIS. OISS advisors can provide some guidance and help if you do need to contact USCIS; we encourage you to communicate with OISS for assistance.Step 1: Prepare Your DocumentsWhen you submit the online I-765 application for OPT or OPT STEM Extension, you will need to prepare to enter the following information and upload the following documents. You will enter information and upload photos and documents into myUSCIS once you start your application.
Please review the Online STEM OPT Application Checklist for a list of documents we recommend you include in your online OPT application.Prepare Your Digital PhotosYou must prepare a digital passport-style photo taken within the last thirty days and the photo must follow the US Department of State guidelines. Please review the following resources
Photo Composition Template
Photo Requirements
Be sure to check that your photo file has an acceptable name that follows USCIS's file name formatting and is saved as either a .jpeg / .jpg or .png file type. The online OPT application has a photo tool you can use to check your photo.Prepare Digital Copies of Required DocumentsSave all documents as .pdf or .jpeg documents and follow USCIS's requirements for file names using English letters, numbers, spaces, periods, hyphens, underscores, and parentheses only.
Your STEM OPT Extension I-20

First you must submit the STEM OPT request at the OISS Portal to receive a new I-20 with your STEM OPT recommendation.
Be sure to sign your new I-20 in ink at the bottom of page 1, in the "Student Attestation" section.
Confirm your I-20 has your STEM OPT recommendation on page 2.


An I-20 from a previous school or degree program

If you are applying for your STEM OPT extension based on a previously earned STEM designated degree prior to your degree at Northwestern, include your previous school I-20


Passport biographical page (submit as government-issued ID)
Current Employment Authorization Documents (EAD) card for your post-completion OPT
Form I-94 arrival record - retrieve your most recent I-94 record and save as a .pdf
NU Transcript and copy of diploma
If you are applying for the 24-month OPT STEM Extension based on a prior STEM degree (i.e., a degree received before your Northwestern University degree), you must submit proof of completion of the STEM degree. This may include a copy of your diploma, transcript, and/or I-20 from your previous school, showing that you received a degree in a STEM area that is on the STEM Designated Degree Program List. Your previous degree must have been awarded from an accredited US institution of higher education currently eligible to sponsor F-1 students.Step 2: Create Your myUSCIS AccountCreate a myUSCIS Account on uscis.gov
Set up your myUSCIS account by going to uscis.gov and selecting "Sign In" --> "Create Account"

You can also create an account from the main USCIS home page at https://www.uscis.gov --> "Sign up”
Another option is to go to the File Online section of the USCIS web site and clicking on the "Create an Account or Sign In" box
You must use your e-mail to create your myUSCIS account.
The system will send you a one-time PIN to log into your account; you will need to continue to use two-factor authentication when signing-in to your account.
Follow all other USCIS instructions to finalize the account creation process.
Keep your account information secure as you will need to return to your account to finish the application and to view updates once you have submitted your application.
Review USCIS's TipsOnce you create your myUSCIS account, read through USCIS's Tips for Filing Forms Online page. After you have reviewed the information, start your online I-765 application (next step).Step 3: Prepare and Submit your Online I-765 Application for STEM OPT ExtensionImportant Notes on TimingYou will be able to save and return to the application at a later time and date, but you should complete all application steps within 60 days of the STEM OPT I-20 issuance date and no later than the last day of your post-completion OPT period.Completing the Online I-765 for STEM OPT ExtensionSection 1: “Getting Started”
Basis of eligibility: select the correct eligibility code

(c)(3)(C) Stem Extension for the 24-month STEM Extension of OPT (after post-completion OPT for STEM Designated Programs)


What is your degree?: include the name of your degree
What is your employer's E-Verify company identification number or a valid E-Verify client company identification number?: to qualify for the STEM OPT extension, your employer must be registered with the E-Verify system. You can obtain the E-Verify number from your employer, or they can register with the system by following these instructions.
Reason for applying:

For the STEM OPT Extension, select “renewal of permission to accept employment”
Select “yes” to “have you previously filed form I-765?



Section 2: “About You”

Your name:

Include any names you have identified as currently or in the past


Your contact information:
Include any names you have identified as currently or in the past


Your contact information:

Current mailing address: this should be a valid address where you can receive your STEM OPT application materials including the mailed paper receipt notice, approval notice, and EAD card. This should be an address where you can receive mail for approximately 6 months into the future in case of application processing delays.

If you will move from your current apartment or travel internationally earlier than 6 months into the future, we recommend you include a friend or family member’s address in your I-765. Put their name in the “in care of” field.
You can also obtain a Post Office Box to receive your mail from USCIS.
Mail from USCIS will come from the U.S. Postal Service, or USPS. You can sign up for informed delivery to receive notifications about mail you receive.
If you include a friend or family member’s address, select “no” to the question is your current mailing address the same as your physical address?

Under “where in the United States do you live” enter your current address even if you will move during your STEM OPT application process.


Other information: F-1 students generally do not have an A-number or a USCIS online account number



Section 3: “Evidence”
To complete the online I-765 form, you will need to upload required documents and evidence.

“2 x 2 photo of you”: follow the guidelines outlined in this section and use the resources provided to ensure your photo is acceptable

 photo must follow the US Department of State Photo Composition Template


“Form I-94”: Your I-94 entry record
“Employment Authorization Document”: Upload your passport biographical page here
Also include your previous EAD card(s).
If you do not have your previous EAD card, you can upload your approval notice or receipt notice for that period of OPT with a statement explaining your EAD card was lost, your OPT dates, and your program information. 




“Form I-20”: Most recent I-20 with OPT STEM Extension recommendation

Request a new I-20 with an OPT STEM recommendation at the OISS Portal
Verify your STEM OPT recommendation at the top of page 2 of your I-20. Be sure to check this STEM OPT recommendation as soon as you receive your new I-20.
Be sure to print, sign (in ink) and then scan your STEM OPT I-20 before you upload it.
The STEM OPT I-20 must be uploaded and your complete I-765 application submitted to USCIS within 60 days from the I-20 issue date and BEFORE your current post-completion OPT expires.
“College Degree”: upload a copy of your STEM Degree and your transcript
“Institution Accreditation”: this section only applies to students applying for their STEM OPT Extension based on a degree earned previous to your most recent degree at Northwestern.

Upload your previous school’s form I-20, degree and transcript if you are applying for STEM OPT based on a previously earned degree.


Any other evidence relevant to your application and your particular circumstances.

Section 4: “Additional Information”
This section is to provide additional explanation or information for your responses in your I-765 or for your uploaded evidence. This section does not allow for uploads.
In this section you can include additional information such as:
Previous SEVIS ID #s (Section: About You; Page: Your immigration information; Question: What is your SEVIS number?)
If you have missing I-20s for previously authorized CPT or OPT, include those details in a written explanation here (Section: Evidence, Page: Form I-20, Question: I-20 Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant Student Status)
If you have multiple citizenships and uploaded different passport biographical pages, this is a good place to include the explanation of your dual citizenship while emphasizing which citizenship was used to obtain your F-1 status. (Section: Evidence, Page: Form I-20, Question: I-20 Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant Student Status)
If your degree program was recently changed to a STEM OPT Extension eligible program and your initial I-20 has a different major name or CIP code listed, contact your OISS Advisor to request a letter from the Registrar outlining this change. Write a statement of explanation here and upload the letter under evidence in the college degree section. (Section: Evidence, Page: College degree, Question: College degree)
If you are applying for the STEM OPT Extension based on a previously obtained degree, include a statement here to explain that this application for STEM OPT is based on your previous degree. (Section: Evidence, Page: College degree, Question: College degree)
Section 5: “Review and Submit”
MyUSCIS will review your application for accuracy and completeness. Correct any errors under the “alerts and warnings” section. If there are no alerts or warnings, your application has been checked for completeness. There is an option to print this page or save your draft I-765 as a .pdf file. It is recommended that you save your draft before submitting.
Submit Payment 

Once your application is complete, the system will direct you to Pay.gov, a US government payment site, to pay the required I-765 application fee.
There, you will be able to pay the application fee using a US credit / debit card or through an ACH transfer (direct withdrawal) from your US checking account.

If you pay by direct withdrawal, you will need to provide your bank account number and your bank's ABA routing number
Look at a copy of a bank check or bank statement from your account for your account number and your bank's ABA routing number or contact your bank for assistance.
IMPORTANT: Once you submit your payment information and that payment is successfully received, USCIS considers your application OFFICIALLY SUBMITTED.

You cannot change or edit your I-765 application responses after payment has been submitted.
The fee is non-refundable once payment has been made.


Once your application is submitted, your application will automatically be assigned a USCIS receipt number.

You can print out an electronic receipt from your myUSCIS portal.
A paper receipt will follow in the mail a few weeks after the electronic submission
*Do NOT submit your online STEM OPT Extension application without your STEM OPT I-20 with your STEM OPT recommendation. You request this I-20 by submitting the STEM OPT Request at the OISS Portal. *Step 4: Monitor your Account for Updates and Follow-upMonitor Your myUSCIS PortalAfter you have submitted your STEM OPT application, you are responsible for monitoring your USCIS account for messages and updates. Through your account, you should be able to:

print an electronic receipt (a paper receipt will also be mailed to you)
send additional information, in case you receive a request for additional evidence (RFE) from USCIS
communicate with USCIS about your case
print a PDF version of your application for your records
It is recommended that you notify your OISS Advisor if USCIS requests any additional information regarding your case, so that we can help to advise you on your options. However, you will have the option of communicating directly with USCIS regarding your case and submitting responses to any requests for additional evidence or information.Biometrics AppointmentIn most cases, F-1 students will NOT be required to schedule a biometrics appointment with USCIS as a part of the I-765 application process. A biometrics appointment involves appearing at a USCIS Application Support Center to have your photographs, fingerprints, and signature taken. If you are asked to do a biometrics appointment, you will receive a notice from USCIS to schedule an appointment.Change of U.S. AddressWhile your OPT is processing, we do not recommend you change your mailing address. If you believe you will move during your OPT application process, please use a friend or family member’s address as your mailing
during your OPT application process, please use a friend or family member’s address as your mailing address.
If you need to change your US address and need to have your EAD sent to another US mailing address, you should update your address information in your USCIS account portal by following the change of address instructions on USCIS's Tips for Filing Forms Online page.
Remember, it is a requirement of your F-1 status to make address updates within 10 days of any change. Once your OPT is approved, you can make address updates at the SEVP Portal. If you need to update your address while your OPT is pending, email your OISS Advisor with your new address.If you have any doubts or questions…OISS Advisors offer general guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM Extension applications as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).
The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
You can schedule an appointment with your OISS advisor or send them an email with specific questions.Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility
may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsStudent EmploymentSTEM OPT for F1 Students
F-1 STEM OPT ExtensionThe 24-month extension of Post-Completion OPT is for students who have completed a degree listed in the STEM Designated Degree Program List. Students who have completed a previous degree in a STEM designated program from a U.S. institution within the past ten years and have completed a new degree at Northwestern University are also eligible for STEM OPT Extension. 
To verify whether you qualify for the STEM OPT Extension, check the STEM Designated Degree Program List and verify your program name and the CIP code for your major found on page 1 of your I-20 under Program of Study. 
Eligibility Requirements for STEM OPT Extension
Your program listed on your I-20 must be listed in the STEM Designated Degree Program List. 
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) maintains a complete list of fields that fall within the regulatory definition of “STEM field” that qualifies certain degrees to fulfill the STEM OPT extension requirement. This list is known as the STEM Designated Degree Program list.  
The  Northwestern Academic Programs and CIP Codesalso identifies programs with a STEM eligible CIP code. Please note this list is organized first by education level (Bachelor's, Master's, Doctorate) and then by CIP Code, in numerical order within each education level.
You must currently be employed or have a job offer from an employer registered with E-Verify. 
Your employer/supervisor must complete the Form I-983 Training Plan for STEM OPT Students. The form is to be completed jointly by the STEM OPT student and employer/supervisor.
You must apply before your post-completion period of OPT expires, and your application must be sent to USCIS within 60 days of the date the STEM OPT Extension I-20 was issued and signed by the OISS Advisor. You may apply up to 90 days before your post-completion OPT expires. Please note that you may continue to work up to 180 days while your STEM OPT Extension application is pending with USCIS and you have your receipt notice.
Employer RequirementsEmployers of F-1 students on STEM OPT Extensions, or who wish to support an employee preparing an application for a 24-month STEM OPT Extension, must meet the following requirements:

Enrolled in E-Verify electronic eligibility verification system
Enrolled in E-Verify electronic eligibility verification system


All employers of STEM OPT Extension students must complete and sign the Form I-983, Training Plan for STEM OPT Students, together with their STEM OPT student employee. For more details on the I-983 and employer responsibilities while they employ a student on their STEM OPT Extension, view this information from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. For details on the I-983 itself, view the overview and instructions linked below.

Form I-983 Overview
Form I-983 Instructions



NOTE: Employers may use existing training programs as long as the existing training program or policy aligns with the goals of the STEM OPT student’s continued learning and all other regulatory requirements.Northwestern University Hiring DepartmentsThe following information will be helpful when completing the I-983 (NOTE: This information is specific to Northwestern University only)
NU FEIN: 362167817
Full Time Employees: 10,839
NAICS Code: 611310
E-Verify Number: 297964
Application ProcessHow do I begin a STEM OPT Extension Request?Submit your STEM OPT Extension request on the OISS Portal.
PLEASE NOTE: The STEM OPT Extension Request will appear as an option in the OISS Portal ONLY if both of the following eligibility conditions are met:

You have completed a degree listed in the STEM Designated Degree Program List
It is 100 days or less from the end date of your Post-Completion OPT
You must submit your request at least 2 weeks before your post-completion OPT end date and you can submit this request as early as 100 days before your post-completion OPT end date. Remember, the request will appear 100 days prior to the end date of Post-Completion OPT as an option in the OISS portal to STEM majors only.
Your STEM OPT Extension request will be processed and your new I-20 with the STEM OPT Extension recommendation will be ready in 5 business days or less. 
You will receive an email notifying you when your new I-20 with the STEM OPT Extension recommendation is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. 
You will then be able to print your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension recommendation from your “Documents” section of the OISS Portal. This is the easiest and fastest way to receive your I-20.
Please be sure to:
Review the top of page 2 of your I-20 to verify your STEM OPT recommendation information is correct.
Sign both I-20s on the bottom of the first page in the “Student Attestation” section. One I-20 is for you to send to USCIS with your OPT application and the 2nd is for you to keep as your current I-20.
Online application for STEM OPT ExtensionFollow these steps:
Prepare STEM OPT Extension application materials: While waiting for your new I-20 with your OPT recommendation, prepare your STEM OPT Extension application documents and digital photo as explained in detail on the OISS resource Online I-765 Application for STEM OPT Extension.
Receive and sign your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension Recommendation: You will receive an email notifying you when your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension recommendation has been processed and is ready for you to access via the OISS Portal. You will then be able to print your updated I-20 with STEM OPT Extension recommendation from your “Documents” section of the OISS Portal. You will need to sign in ink in the student attestation section of the document.
Review all your documents carefully before sending or submitting your STEM OPT Extension application: Check your major and degree level on page 1 of your I-20 and check your STEM OPT Extension recommendation on page 2 of your I-20. You are responsible for your STEM OPT Extension application and we recommend that you independently check dates, deadlines, and the I-765 instructions We recommend you photocopy and/or save an electronic copy of your FULL application.
File your COMPLETE application with USCIS within 30 days of the date the OISS processed your STEM OPT Extension request. The STEM OPT Extension recommendation on the OPT I-20 is only valid for 30 days. OISS recommends you submit your complete STEM OPT application within 15 days of the date your advisor recommends you for STEM OPT Extension on the I-20.
IMPORTANT:The application MUST be received by USCIS within 30 days of OISS recommending STEM OPT Extension in your SEVIS record and issuing your STEM OPT Extension I-20 or STEM OPT will be denied.If it has been more than 30 days since your STEM OPT Extension I-20 was issued and you have not sent or submitted your application, please submit a new STEM OPT Extension request at the OISS Portal and email your OISS advisor.Frequently Asked Questions about STEM OPT and the application processWhat are the requirements for the photos?OISS strongly recommends students applying for STEM OPT use a professional visa/passport photo service (such as the photo department at Walgreens or CVS) to ensure the photo meets all requirements for the STEM OPT application. We are aware of numerous circumstances in which students initially received approval utilizing the online photo tool, and later had their OPT application rejected due to issues with the photo. The acceptance of your digital image or photo
application rejected due to issues with the photo. The acceptance of your digital image or photo is at the discretion of USCIS.
The digital photo requirements for filing online are different from the paper photo requirements for filing a paper application by mail. See requirements below.
Digital photo requirements for filing your STEM OPT application ONLINE

You must prepare a digital passport-style photo taken within the last 30 days and the photo must follow the U.S. Department of State guidelines. Please review the following resources:
Photo Requirements
Photo Composition Template.
Be sure to check that your photo file has an acceptable name that follows USCIS's file name formatting outlined in the instructions and is saved as either a .jpeg / .jpg or .png file type. The online OPT application has a photo tool you can use to check your photo.
How long will it take for my STEM OPT application to be approved?Processing times vary greatly, but you should expect USCIS to take about 3 – 5 months  to approve your STEM OPT Extension application.Can I work while my STEM OPT application is pending?
Your work authorization and F-1 status is automatically extended for up to 180 days while the STEM OPT Extension application is pending.
The 180 days counts from the end date of your initial Post-Completion OPT period.
Only applies if your STEM OPT Extension application was received by USCIS before the end date on your initial Post-Completion OPT period.
Your I-797C Receipt Notice serves as documentation of your pending STEM OPT Extension application.
What are CIP codes?Classification of Instructions Programs (CIP) codes are published by the National Center for Education Statistics (NES).   Your CIP code determines whether your major has been designated as a STEM major eligible for the STEM OPT Extension. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) STEM Designated Degree Program List is a complete list of fields of study that DHS considers to be science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) fields of study for purposes of the 24-month STEM optional practical training extension.My department changed CIP codes. Can I apply for the STEM OPT Extension?There is an administrative process that NU departments must go through to change the CIP code. Once the CIP code change has been approved, the NU registrar updates the CIP code based on the parameters of the approval. After the registrar updates the CIP code, the OISS will update the CIP codes in SEVIS. You may request a new I-20 with the updated CIP code. Please request a
the CIP codes in SEVIS. You may request a new I-20 with the updated CIP code. Please request a reprint for your I-20 via the OISS Portal. In the request, please choose Other from the drop down and explain that your CIP code changed in the area provided.
Once the CIP code has been updated, you may meet the CIP code requirements for STEM OPT Extension eligibility.Does USCIS offer premium processing for STEM OPT applications?Yes, USCIS now offers premium processing for both OPT and STEM OPT applications. The timeline for premium processing is 30 calendar days and requires you to file a Form I-907 in addition to the I-765 There is an additional fee of $1,685 for premium processing, which is in addition to the I-765 application fee. Read more about USCIS premium processing.Can I apply for the OPT STEM Extension based on a prior degree?If you otherwise qualify for the STEM OPT Extension and can fill-out the I-983 training plan with your current employer outlining how you are using your STEM coursework in your job, you can apply for the STEM OPT extension based on a previously earned degree as long as both degrees were received from currently accredited educational institutions.
You will need to contact your OISS Advisor to initiate a STEM OPT Extension request based on a prior degree. Can I apply for STEM OPT more than once?If you complete another STEM-eligible degree at a higher academic level, you may apply for a second 24 month period of STEM OPT if you otherwise meet the STEM OPT Extension qualifications.What is the H-1B Cap- Gap Extension?A cap-gap extension is a regulatory provision which extends an eligible F-1 student's status to bridge the gap between the end of F-1 status and start of H-1B status, thereby allowing the student to remain in the U.S. during the "gap”. The cap-gap extension is available to students who, as of April 1st, were either on approved OPT or in their 60-day grace period and have a pending or approved change-of-status H-1B petition with USCIS that was filed in a timely manner.  To qualify for the "H-1B cap-gap extension" you must be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the
be in valid F-1 status, and you must be the beneficiary of an H-1B petition that meets all of the following:
Has been timely filed.
Requests an employment start date of October 1 of the following fiscal year
Requests a change of status
The cap-gap extension appears on a student’s I-20. To request your I-20 reflecting the cap-gap extension, submit the Cap-Gap Extension request at the OISS Portal.
Cap-Gap extensions cannot be used if you will be in H-1B status in a non-profit or research educational institution.
For more information, please contact your OISS advisor.When your EAD arrivesUpon receiving your Employment Authorization Document (EAD), check the following:1.	Verify Personal Information:
Ensure your name is spelled correctly and matches the name on your Form I-20.
Confirm the accuracy of your date of birth, country of birth, and sex.
2.	Review Work Authorization Dates:
Check the start and end dates for which you are authorized to work.
3.	Confirm the Correct Category:
For Post-Completion OPT, the category should be CO3B.
For STEM OPT Extension, the category should be CO3C.
4.  If your EAD card contains incorrect information due a USCIS error:
4.  If your EAD card contains incorrect information due a USCIS error:
You must return the original EAD card to USCIS to get it corrected. See Replacement EAD Card for instructions.
If you are not sure if the error was made by USCIS or if you have questions, please contact your OISS Advisor.
While on STEM OPTThe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) requires schools to maintain certain information in SEVIS for all students currently on approved STEM OPT. As an F-1 student on STEM OPT, you continue to be under Northwestern University's sponsorship. As such, OISS continues to maintain your SEVIS record so you will remain in valid visa status.
Consult the While on STEM OPT resource for important information related to rules and reporting requirements, practical matters, ending STEM OPT, and much more.Are the reporting requirements and rules for STEM OPT the same as 12 month OPT?Compared to the 12-month OPT period, there are several additional requirements while on STEM OPT.  Details and instructions related to  these requirements are outlined on the While on STEM OPT section including:
Reporting requirements while on STEM OPT
International Travel while on STEM OPT
Practical matters while on STEM OPT (health insurance, taxes, etc.)
Ending STEM OPT and departing the U.S. or changing status
Disclaimer Statement
The Northwestern University Office of International Student & Scholar Services (OISS) offers guidance on Optional Practical Training (OPT) and OPT STEM processes as a courtesy to NU students. We make every attempt to ensure that we provide you with the most up to date information available. However, any advice provided to you by our office does not constitute legal advice. You should always independently check all deadlines and all OPT and STEM OPT application documents for accuracy before mailing them or submitting them online to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). The OPT application is a personal application for which you are responsible. The application preparation and USCIS case decision will vary depending on the facts at issue in your particular case.  While OISS exercises best efforts to provide you with the most current guidance, please be aware that USCIS may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility
may change its interpretation of applicable policies, procedures, regulations, and eligibility requirements at any time.  OISS is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims liability for, any errors or omissions relating to your OPT application and any decisions made by USCIS.  For legal advice, students are encouraged to consult with a licensed and experienced immigration attorney at their own expense.
HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasChanging Visa StatusVisa Change Guide
Visa Change GuideReview our guide below for information about eligibility, timeline issues for various transfers and more.From B1/B-2 to F-1Please note: Individuals in B-1/B-2 status may change status to F-1 only if, at the time of entry to the U.S., an indication was made to immigration officials of the intent to study in the U.S. In most cases, an immigration officer will stamp the I-94 card with a “Prospective Student” notation. Part of the application process will include a questionnaire which asks why you did not apply for a student visa to come to the U.S. The questionnaire verifies that you did not have fraudulent intent upon application for the visitor visa or upon entry to the U.S. 
Common Questions:
How early should I submit my application for the COS to USCIS?It is recommended individuals maintain their current non-immigrant status until at least 30 days prior to the report date listed on the I-20/DS-2019 AND until a Receipt Notice issued by USCIS has been received.
Can I study before my new status has been approved?No.
Can I work before my new status has been approved?No, not even on campus. 
Can I receive an assistantship or other NU funding (not including NU loans) before my new status has been approved?No. Note that it is possible to expedite your application based on receipt of the award. Include with your COS application an official award letter from your department and a letter from yourself explaining the hardship of not receiving the award if the COS is not approved prior to the start of classes.
When can I begin to work on Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?
OPT: After one academic year of full-time enrollment in F-1 status.
CPT: In most cases, after one academic year of full-time enrollment in F-1 status. 


What should I do if I have not received my approval by the start date listed on my NU I-20?If you have not received your visa approval by the program start date listed on your NU I-20, submit the Immigration Document Deferral Request on the OISS Portal. You can also contact your OISS advisor for more information.  
What should I do once I receive the I-797 COS Approval Notice from USCIS?Check-in with OISS upon receipt of the Approval Notice. Bring your passport and I-20.
From F-2 to F-1Common Questions:
How early should I submit my application for the COS to USCIS?It is recommended individuals maintain their current non-immigrant status until at least 30 days prior to the report date listed on the I-20/DS-2019 AND until a Receipt Notice issued by USCIS has been received.
Can I study before my new status has been approved?No. Please contact an advisor if you have any questions. 
Can I work before my new status has been approved?No, not even on campus. 
Can I receive an assistantship or other NU funding (not including NU loans) before my new status has been approved?No. Note that it is possible to expedite your application based on receipt of the award. Include with your COS application an official award letter from your department and a letter from yourself explaining the hardship of not receiving the award if the COS is not approved prior to the start of classes.
When can I begin to work on Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?
OPT: After one academic year of full-time enrollment in F-1 status.
CPT: In most cases, after one academic year of full-time enrollment in F-1 status


What should I do if I have not received my approval by the start date listed on my NU I-20?If you have not received your visa approval by the program start date listed on your NU I-20, submit the Immigration Document Deferral Request on the OISS Portal. You can also contact your OISS advisor for more information.  
What should I do once I receive the I-797 COS Approval Notice from USCIS?Check-in with OISS upon receipt of the Approval Notice. Bring your passport and I-20.
From H-1B to F1Common Questions:
How early should I submit my application for the COS to USCIS?It is recommended individuals maintain their current non-immigrant status until at least 30 days prior to the report date listed on the I-20/DS-2019 AND until a Receipt Notice issued by USCIS has been received.
Can I study before my new status has been approved?Yes. 
Can I work before my new status has been approved?No, not even on campus. H-1B employment must end at the expiration of the H-1B status or upon approval of the F-1 status, whichever is earlier. 
Can I receive an assistantship or other NU funding (not including NU loans) before my new status has been approved?No. 
When can I begin to work on Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?
OPT: After one academic year of full-time enrollment in a status that permits full-time study. Time accrued studying in H-1B status can be credited toward the one academic year requirement.
CPT: In most cases, after one academic year of full-time enrollment in a status that permits full-time study. Time accrued studying in H-1B status can be credited toward the one academic year requirement.
What should I do if I have not received my approval by the start date listed on my NU I-20?H-1B status-holders may begin attending classes full-time as long as the H-1B status was maintained until at least 30 days prior to the I-20 start date AND the I-797 COS Receipt Notice has been received. If the Approval Notice has not yet been received by the I-20 start date, the I-20 must be deferred. Contact the International Office to request the deferral. Remember: as long as the H-1B status was maintained until at least 30 days prior to the I-20 start date AND the I-797 Receipt Notice has been received, the H-1B may attend classes full-time while the application is pending. 
What should I do once I receive the I-797 COS Approval Notice from USCIS?Check-in with OISS upon receipt of the Approval Notice. Bring your passport and I-20. 
From H-4 to F-1Common Questions:
How early should I submit my application for the COS to USCIS?It is recommended individuals maintain their current non-immigrant status until at least 30 days prior to the report date listed on the I-20/DS-2019 AND until a Receipt Notice issued by USCIS has been received.
Can I study before my new status has been approved?Yes.
Can I work before my new status has been approved?No, not even on campus. 
Can I receive an assistantship or other NU funding (not including NU loans) before my new status has been approved?No. Note that it is possible to expedite your application based on receipt of the award. Include with your COS application an official award letter from your department and a letter from yourself explaining the hardship of not receiving the award if the COS is not approved prior to the start of classes. 
When can I begin to work on Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?
OPT: After one academic year of full-time enrollment in a status that permits full-time study. Time accrued studying in H-4 status can be credited toward the one academic year requirement.
CPT: In most cases, after one academic year of full-time enrollment in a status that permits full-time study. Time accrued studying in H-4 status can be credited toward the one academic year requirement.
What should I do if I have not received my approval by the start date listed on my NU I-20?If you have not received your visa approval by the program start date listed on your NU I-20, submit the Immigration Document Deferral Request on the OISS Portal. You can also contact your OISS advisor for more information.  
What should I do once I receive the I-797 COS Approval Notice from USCIS?Check-in with OISS upon receipt of the Approval Notice. Bring your passport and I-20.
From J-1 to F-1Please note: As a J-1, you may be, or may become, subject to the 2-year home country physical presence requirement after the completion of your degree program, which could affect your future U.S. immigration options. Please link to the Department of State website for more information about the 2-year home residency requirement. If you are changing status from J to another status and are subject to the 2-year home residency requirement, you must first obtain a waiver of the requirement OR leave the U.S. and apply for the visa stamp abroad. 
Common Questions:
How early should I submit my application for the COS to USCIS?It is recommended individuals maintain their current non-immigrant status until at least 30 days prior to the report date listed on the I-20/DS-2019 AND until a Receipt Notice issued by USCIS has been received.
Can I study before my new status has been approved?Yes.
Can I work before my new status has been approved?Yes. 
Can I receive an assistantship or other NU funding (not including NU loans) before my new status has been approved?Yes. 
When can I begin to work on Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?
OPT: After one academic year of full-time enrollment in a status that permits full-time study. Time accrued studying in J-1 status can be credited toward the one academic year requirement.
CPT: In most cases, after one academic year of full-time enrollment in a status that permits full-time study. Time accrued studying in J-1 status can be credited toward the one academic year requirement.
What should I do if I have not received my approval by the start date listed on my NU I-20?If you have not received your visa approval by the program start date listed on your NU I-20, submit the Immigration Document Deferral Request on the OISS Portal. You can also contact your OISS advisor for more information.  
What should I do once I receive the I-797 COS Approval Notice from USCIS?Check-in with OISS upon receipt of the Approval Notice. Bring your passport and I-20.
From F-1 to J-1Please note: A change of status from F-1 to J-1 may not always be possible. Unless you are participating in an established exchange program, a significant portion of your financial support (non-loan based) must come from your home government, a U.S. government agency, an international organization, or scholarships, fellowships and assistantships from Northwestern University (NU loans of any kind do not constitute institutional support). Check the J-1 status requirements on your I-20/DS-2019 Request Form for more details concerning the difference between the F and J statuses. Change to the J-1 status should not be for the sole purpose of obtaining employment eligibility for yourself and/or your dependents.
As a J-1, you may be, or may become, subject to the 2-year home country physical presence requirement after the completion of your degree program, which could affect your future U.S. immigration options. Please visit to the Department of State website for more information about the 2-year home residency requirement. If you are changing status from J to another status and are subject to the 2-year home residency requirement, you must first obtain a waiver of the requirement OR leave the U.S. and apply for the visa stamp abroad. 
Common Questions:
How early should I submit my application for the COS to USCIS?It is recommended individuals maintain their current non-immigrant status until at least 30 days prior to the report date listed on the I-20/DS-2019 AND until a Receipt Notice issued by USCIS has been received.
Can I study before my new status has been approved?Yes.
Can I work before my new status has been approved?Yes.
Can I receive an assistantship or other NU funding (not including NU loans) before my new status has been approved?Yes.
When can I begin to work on Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?Not applicable. Contact OISS to discuss J1 employment options.
What should I do if I have not received my approval by the start date listed on my DS-2019?Contact OISS.
What should I do once I receive the I-797 COS Approval Notice from USCIS?Check-in with OISS upon receipt of the Approval Notice. Bring your passport and I-20.
From F-1 or H-4 to F-2Please note: Individuals changing to a dependent status (F-2 or J-2): Please provide proof of your relationship to the F-1 or J-1, such as a marriage or birth certificate. Furthermore, copies of the F-1 or J-1 Form I-20 or DS-2019, passport ID page, current visa stamp if applicable, and current I-94 card should be submitted with the application. Financial evidence documenting support for both the F-1/J-1 and F-2/J-2 must accompany the application. 
Common Questions:
How early should I submit my application for the COS to USCIS?Submit COS application with the F-1 application.
Can I study before my new status has been approved?F-2 dependents are not eligible to study fulltime in the U.S. Please contact an advisor if you have any questions. 
Can I work before my new status has been approved?F-2 dependents are not eligible for employment authorization. 
Can I receive an assistantship or other NU funding (not including NU loans) before my new status has been approved?Not applicable.
When can I begin to work on Optional Practical Training (OPT) or Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?F-2 dependents are not eligible for employment authorization. 
What should I do if I have not received my approval by the start date listed on my NU I-20?Not applicable.
HomeInternational StudentsPreparing for ArrivalPort of Entry, Arrival and Check-in
Port of Entry, Arrival and Check-inUseful LinksTravel to Northwestern
Orientation
Arrival Checklist
I-94 Record
OISS Portal Plan your Arrival
F-1 and J-1 students may not arrive to the U.S. more than 30 days before the start date listed on the F-1 I-20 or the J-1 DS-2019.  If you decide to come earlier than this, you will enter as a tourist and must leave the United States so that you may re-enter in the correct F-1 or J-1 status no more than 30 days before the start date listed on your immigration document.
Before you plan your arrival date and make travel plans, be sure that you are aware of your required international student orientation dates, program orientation date for graduate students, or Wildcat Welcome dates for undergraduate students.
Inspection at a U.S. Port of Entry
Upon inspection at a U.S. Port of Entry, the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer will ask for these documents:
Northwestern-issued I-20 or DS-2019;
A valid passport valid six-months into the future (students with passport countries listed here do not need a passport valid six-months into the future);


A valid F-1 or J-1 visa stamp (Canadians do not obtain an F-1 or J-1 visa);
Your SEVIS I-901 fee payment receipt;
You may be asked for your Northwestern letter of admission
Keep these documents with you during your travel. Be prepared to present these documents to CBP upon arrival. If you are traveling by airplane, you will present these documents for inspection before you have access to your larger checked luggage so please keep these documents in your carry-on items during your flight.
I-94 Arrival Record
The I-94 is your official arrival record to record your entry to the U.S., your immigration (visa) category, and your approved length of stay. The OISS recommends that you retrieve and check your I-94 arrival record every time you re-enter the U.S. In most cases, I-94 entry records are only issued electronically. Many U.S. Ports of Entry no longer issue entry stamps as well.
Visit the CBP I-94 website to retrieve your I-94.
Check your I-94 for accuracy including these details:

Admission date (the date your arrived to the U.S.)
Visa status
Personal information
Admission date (the date your arrived to the U.S.)
Visa status
Personal information

See our resource on the I-94 Record for additional information including how to correct a mistake on your I-94 Record.
Upon Arrival to Northwestern:Complete online student check-in
International Student check-in is required to activate your SEVIS record. All international students in F or J status must check-in through the OISS Portal within 5 days of arrival to the U.S.  Additional instructions and other "upon arrival" required tasks can be found on the Arrival Checklist for New Students page.
HomeInternational StudentsAbout Student VisasVisa Compliance RequirementsReinstating F1 and J1 Visa Status After Violation
Reinstating F1 and J1 Visa Status After ViolationIf you are a F-1 or J-1 student who is currently out of status or recently terminated, you may apply to regain your immigration through the reinstatement process.
About Visa Violations
We recommend that any student who is unsure about his or her current status (and considering reinstatement) see an OISS adviser as soon as possible. A student may be in violation of his/her immigration status for one or more of the following reasons:

Enrolling less than full-time.
Failure to enroll without prior OISS authorization.
Changing academic level without prior OISS authorization.
Failure to apply for an I-20/DS-2019 extension before the end-date listed.
For New and Transfer-In students, failure to complete "check-in' process with OISS within five days of arrival on-campus.

How to Apply for Reinstatement
How to Apply for Reinstatement

The first step in applying for reinstatement is consultation with OISS as soon as possible. We can help you understand the detailed application and procedure, which is very specific. 
Please note that an application must be submitted within five months of the status violation.

HomeInternational StudentsStudent Employment
Student EmploymentEmployment OptionsF-1 Students
On-campus employment
CPT (during your academic program)
OPT (after your academic program)
STEM OPT (OPT for students in the STEM field)
J-1 students
On-campus employment
Academic Training (during/after your academic program)
Job Search Resources and Help
Northwestern Student Job Board (Click on "Job Board" for listing of currently available on-campus jobs). Please note F-1 and J-1 students are not eligible for jobs identified as "Federal Work-Study."
International Student Career Planning Guide
All students: Northwestern Career Advancement (contact your career advisor based on your school)
All students: Chicago Field Studies academic internship program 
McCormick students: Engineering Career Development
Medill students:

IMC
Undergraduate Journalism
Graduate Journalism
Alumni


Communication students: EPICS
For Employers
What Employers Should Know

HomeInternational StudentsStudent Employment
Student EmploymentEmployment OptionsF-1 Students
On-campus employment
CPT (during your academic program)
OPT (after your academic program)
STEM OPT (OPT for students in the STEM field)
J-1 students
On-campus employment
Academic Training (during/after your academic program)
Job Search Resources and Help
Northwestern Student Job Board (Click on "Job Board" for listing of currently available on-campus jobs). Please note F-1 and J-1 students are not eligible for jobs identified as "Federal Work-Study."
International Student Career Planning Guide
All students: Northwestern Career Advancement (contact your career advisor based on your school)
All students: Chicago Field Studies academic internship program 
McCormick students: Engineering Career Development
Medill students:

IMC
Undergraduate Journalism
Graduate Journalism
Alumni


Communication students: EPICS
For Employers
What Employers Should Know

HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements
News & Announcements
We communicate information in a variety of ways:

Social media: Follow us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram
Announcements and government updates: These are issued by OISS and posted below

Announcements and Government Updates


Narrow News by:

View All
Announcements
Government Updates



Filter by Year:

View All
2022
2021
2020
2019
View All
Announcements
Government Updates



Filter by Year:

View All
2022
2021
2020
2019










For Students: COVID-19 testing requirement extended through next week
January 14, 2022
Read Northwestern's January 14th announcement regarding pending completion of Wildcat Wellness, return to in-person classes & activities, extended COVID-19 testing requirement, and reminder about vaccination booster requirement.



Announcements
2022
Announcements
2022





COVID-19 Response Updates for January Return to Campus
December 31, 2021
As the pandemic has shifted and evolved over the past several weeks, NU has been in frequent contact with public health officials and our own infectious disease experts to determine the best path forward for the Northwestern community. Safeguarding the health and safety of our students, faculty and staff remains our top priority.  NU also must prioritize the needs of our community and the broader public health approaches for navigating the pandemic.

With our return from Winter Recess just around the corner, we want to provide some important reminders and updates. As always, the situation can change quickly, and we will provide updates as we have them. 



Announcements
2021





Clarification on January Return to Campus and In-Person Testing
December 21, 2021
Follow-up clarification message regarding December 20th announcement. 



Announcements
2021
Announcements
2021





COVID-19 booster shot requirement & Wildcat Wellness in January
December 20, 2021
Important updates about Winter Quarter 2022 that further ongoing efforts to protect the Northwestern community from the spread of the COVID-19 virus.



Announcements
2021





Northwestern University COVID-19 Updates
August 20, 2021
Important Fall updates for students include student vaccination requirements, testing requirements, symptom-tracking requirements, masking requirements and more. 



Announcements
2021





ICE Proposal and Response 
October 23, 2020
Northwestern University submitted a public comment letter in response to the ICE proposal, "Establishing a Fixed Time Period of Admission and an Extension of Stay Procedure for Nonimmigrant Academic Students, Exchange Visitors, and Representatives of Foreign Information Media."  



Government Updates
2020
Government Updates
2020





Northwestern Response to and Information on Fall 2020 SEVP Guidance
July 10, 2020
The U.S. government is withdrawing the directive that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced on July 6, which would have prohibited international students in the U.S. from taking a fully online/remote course load during the Fall 2020 term while remaining in F-1 status. Following legal challenges from Northwestern University and from higher education institutions and states nationwide, a federal judge announced today that ICE will rescind the directive.



Announcements
2020





Information and Guidance Based on the ICE Announcement
July 09, 2020
Northwestern University leadership has been working diligently to review the new ICE guidelines.



Announcements
2020
Announcements
2020





Northwestern Joins Amicus Brief to Fight New ICE Guidance
July 08, 2020
As Northwestern has been taking steps toward a safe, phased return to campus for the Fall Quarter, we have already been planning to institute a hybrid model of remote and in-person courses. I therefore expect that our international student community will be largely unaffected by these capricious and indefensible directives.



Announcements
2020





Northwestern Responds to ICE Announcement
July 07, 2020
Northwestern is studying the new ICE announcement closely to determine how the modifications to the Student and Exchange Visitor Program may impact our international students.



Announcements
2020





Northwestern’s Commitment to an Inclusive, Global Academic Community
June 02, 2020
Response to Proclamation on the Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and Researchers from the People's Republic of China



Announcements
2020
Announcements
2020





Update: Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and Researchers from China
June 02, 2020
Read an update to President Trump's May 2020 “Proclamation on the Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and Researchers from the People’s Republic of China.” 



Government Updates
2020





Northwestern University Message to Chinese Students
June 07, 2019
We want to reassure our Chinese students and scholars that they are critical to Northwestern University’s mission, and we are committed to assisting them in the visa process. To date, we have seen no visas denied for Chinese students and scholars who are coming to Northwestern, and we will continue to make efforts to help them in the process if they experience problems.



Announcements
2019
Announcements
2019

HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2022For Students: COVID-19 testing requirement extended through next week
For Students: COVID-19 testing requirement extended through next week January 14, 2022Read Northwestern's January 14th announcement regarding pending completion of Wildcat Wellness, return to in-person classes & activities, extended COVID-19 testing requirement, and reminder about vaccination booster requirement.

HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2021COVID-19 Response Updates for January Return to Campus
COVID-19 Response Updates for January Return to Campus December 31, 2021Read the full announcement regarding Wildcat Wellness, testing, resumption of in-person activities, new CDC guidance, contact tracing, boosters, and more.
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2021Clarification on January Return to Campus and In-Person Testing
Clarification on January Return to Campus and In-Person Testing December 21, 2021Dear students,
We have received a number of questions about Northwestern’s expectations for in-person testing and returning to campus in January. We appreciate your desire to plan as far in advance as possible.
To reinforce the message we sent yesterday: All graduate and undergraduate students who are registered for in-person classes are required to take one in-person, on-campus COVID-19 test each week of Wildcat Wellness, which runs from Jan. 1 through 8 a.m. on Tuesday, Jan. 18. Students who live in the residence halls are welcome to move in as early as Jan. 1. All students taking in-person classes during Winter Quarter must arrive early enough to complete their first-week testing requirement—no later than Friday, Jan. 7. A second in-person, on-campus test is required during the second week of Wildcat Wellness. Students who do not complete these testing requirements will be referred to the Office of Community Standards for non-compliance.
Read the full December 21, 2021 announcement from Luke Figora, Vice President for Operations, Northwestern University.
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2021COVID-19 booster shot requirement & Wildcat Wellness in January
COVID-19 booster shot requirement & Wildcat Wellness in January December 20, 2021Read the full announcement.

HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2021Northwestern University COVID-19 Updates
Northwestern University COVID-19 Updates August 20, 2021Visit the COVID-19 and Campus Updates website to read the full announcement, Important Fall Updates for Students. 
COVID-19 FAQs for International Students provides additional guidance.
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2020ICE Proposal and Response 
ICE Proposal and Response  October 23, 2020On September 25, 2020, ICE published a proposed rule "Establishing a Fixed Time Period of Admission and an Extension of Stay Procedure for Nonimmigrant Academic Students, Exchange Visitors, and Representatives of Foreign Information Media."  Northwestern University submitted a public comment letter in response.
OISS will continue to follow all developments related to the proposed rule and will update the international community as we are able.
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2020Northwestern Response to and Information on Fall 2020 SEVP Guidance
Northwestern Response to and Information on Fall 2020 SEVP Guidance July 10, 2020Dear International Students,
I am writing to share some wonderful news. The U.S. government is withdrawing the directive that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced on July 6, which would have prohibited international students in the U.S. from taking a fully online/remote course load during the Fall 2020 term while remaining in F-1 status. Following legal challenges from Northwestern University and from higher education institutions and states nationwide, a federal judge announced today that ICE will rescind the directive. This means international students currently in F-1 status will be able to keep this status for the Fall 2020 term, provided they register for a full course load, regardless of whether these courses are in person or online/remote, and regardless of whether they are in the United States or outside the United States.
告诉大家一个好消息。美国政府已经决定取消移民局七月六日发出的有关禁止在美持有F-1签证的国际学生在2020年秋季只上网课的指令。鉴于西北大学及国内其他高等院校发出的申诉，一位联邦法官今天宣布，移民局将撤回其七月六日发出的指令。这就意味着只要注册全职学生身份，无论是不是网课，无论本人是否在美国上课，所有国际学生都可以合法保持其F1签证的身份。
This is a victory not only for international students at Northwestern University, but for the higher education community as a whole. Our strength as a world-class university—the global conversations happening across our campus every day, the creative work in the arts and the groundbreaking research in our laboratories to address the world’s greatest challenges—depends on you, the world’s best and brightest. Your presence and your diverse perspectives are a part of what makes Northwestern a great global university. Please know that all of us—your student colleagues, your teachers and University leaders care deeply about you and are grateful you are a part of our community.
这不仅仅是西北大学国际学生取得的一个胜利，同时也是整个高等教育大家庭取得的一个胜利。在我们这样一个世界级大学的校园里，每天都在发生着全球级的对话。我们在艺术领域的创新，我们在实验室里对解决世界棘手问题的探索，这一切都离不开你们，当今世界上的最强大脑。你们的存在使西北大学成为了一个拥有多元思维的世界级高等学府。在你们的同学、教授及校领导的眼里，你们是我们西北大学大家庭里不可或缺的一个组成部分。
While we hope you are as relieved as we are to hear this news, we know this has been a very difficult week and a difficult year. We remain committed to supporting you in every way possible as you make plans for the Fall term and beyond. I encourage you to reach out to your Office of International Student and Scholar Services advisor with any specific questions or concerns pertaining to your status or plans.
听到这个消息，希望你们和我们一样松了一口气。但是我们非常清楚对你们来说过去的一个星期，甚至过去的一年是一种什么样的煎熬。在即将到来的秋季学期及未来的日子里，我们将一如既往地做好你们的坚强后盾。如果你们就身份及计划安排有什么问题，请及时向学校国际学生及学者服务办公室的顾问咨询。
We will continue to keep you apprised of new developments as we plan for the Winter and Spring terms. Again, we greatly value you being a part of our community, and we are fully committed to supporting you all in every way possible as we prepare to resume our research, teaching and learning activities as safely as possible this fall.
我们将会及时向大家通报有关冬季学期及春季学期的安排计划。在此我们再次强调，你们每一位国际学生都是西北大学大家庭的重要一员。 我们会为你们秋季即将重启的科研、教学及学业保驾护航。
Sincerely,
特此敬礼，
Annelise Riles
万安黎
Associate Provost for Global Affairs, Northwestern University
西北大学负责国际事务的副教务长
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2020Information and Guidance Based on the ICE Announcement
Information and Guidance Based on the ICE Announcement July 9, 2020Dear International Students,
I am writing to share information on the new directive that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced on July 6.
Northwestern University leadership has been working diligently to review the new ICE guidelines. Under the new directive, you would be prohibited from taking a fully online/remote course load during the Fall term if you are in the U.S. in F-1 status. However, we expect the hybrid model of online/remote and in-person courses we plan to institute this fall will accommodate the vast majority of your needs and enable you to continue in your studies at Northwestern.
Below please find additional information and guidance based on the ICE announcement. We have also posted an FAQs page for reference and will continue to share new information or guidance as it becomes available.
Northwestern University intends to operate on a hybrid instruction model during the Fall term. This model involves a mix of online/remote and in-person courses, including independent study and graduate-level research courses.
Continuing, new and incoming transfer international students who will be in the U.S. for the Fall term may not register for a fully online/remote course load while also remaining in the U.S. in valid F-1 status. To maintain F-1 status, students must (1) enroll in at least one course that includes an in-person instructional component and (2) take the minimum number of online/remote courses required to make normal progress in their respective degree programs. Because Northwestern will offer a number of in-person courses, we expect most of our international students will remain eligible to study on our campus this academic year. The Northwestern Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) is working on a procedure to reissue I-20 forms for international students who will be in the U.S. during the Fall term. OISS will share more information about this in the coming weeks.
Continuing students who will be outside of the U.S. in the fall are allowed to take a fully online/remote course load. However, students who reside outside the U.S. will no longer be able to maintain their F-1 status. Prior to returning to the U.S., these students will need to work with their OISS advisor to ensure they have a valid F-1 record with which to return.


New international students who will be outside of the U.S. for the Fall term are allowed to take a fully online/remote course load, but will need to defer their F-1 SEVIS record and I-20 form. Starting on July 10, students can submit a New Student Immigration Document Deferral request through the OISS Portal to defer their immigration documents. You will receive an email with more detail about this process soon.
We understand that there are still outstanding questions and concerns, and we are working intensely to find answers. For students studying on the quarter system and in the Pritzker School of Law, course schedules including tags identifying those courses that will include face-to-face components will be published in late July and August. Again, if you are a continuing, new or incoming transfer international student who will be in the U.S. during the fall, we encourage you to register for at least one hybrid or face-to-face course that meets the requirements of your program.
We will provide updates as new information becomes available. In the interim, please do not hesitate to contact your OISS advisor with any questions or concerns.
We are fully committed to supporting our international students in every way possible. As President Schapiro stated in his message yesterday evening, your University community stands beside you in this painful moment. You are not alone, and we will support you in the days ahead.
Sincerely,
Annelise Riles
Associate Provost for Global Affairs, Northwestern University
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2020Northwestern Joins Amicus Brief to Fight New ICE Guidance
Northwestern Joins Amicus Brief to Fight New ICE Guidance July 8, 2020Dear members of the Northwestern community,
I am horrified by the federal guidelines issued this week by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), which threaten to revoke the visa status of international students who take all-remote classes this fall.
As Northwestern has been taking steps toward a safe, phased return to campus for the Fall Quarter, we have already been planning to institute a hybrid model of remote and in-person courses. I therefore expect that our international student community will be largely unaffected by these capricious and indefensible directives.
Whether or not our students are impacted directly, we will work tirelessly with our academic peers to ensure no students anywhere are affected.
We have joined an amicus brief supporting a lawsuit filed this morning by Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that seeks to keep the new directives from going into effect.
Northwestern’s overriding priority, since the beginning of this global health emergency, has been to ensure the safety of all our students and enable them to remain on course toward completion of their degrees.
I want every one of our international students to know that your University community stands beside you in this painful moment. You are not alone. We will support you in the days ahead.
Sincerely,
Morton SchapiroPresident and Professor
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2020Northwestern Responds to ICE Announcement
Northwestern Responds to ICE Announcement July 7, 2020Dear members of our Northwestern community,
Northwestern is studying the new ICE announcement closely to determine how the modifications to the Student and Exchange Visitor Program may impact our international students.
Given the pandemic, the University plans to continue ramping up research and to offer both in-person and remote classes this fall as students return to campus in greater numbers. Since there will be a number of in-person classes, we are hopeful most international students will remain eligible to study on our campus this academic year, and we will be taking steps to help ensure that our international students are in compliance with the new policy.
We remain firmly committed to ensuring that international students are able to study at Northwestern, both remotely and in person, this year. As a premier global academic institution, we bring together the best and the brightest from around the world to learn from our faculty and one another and to conduct research that addresses the most cutting-edge science and the most pressing global challenges. Our international students are critical to this mission. They bring much needed expertise, diverse perspectives and a global outlook to our classrooms and our laboratories, and they are a critical part of what makes our community so special.   
We are grateful for all that our international students bring to our community, and Northwestern remains committed to supporting them in every way possible. A Wildcat is a Wildcat, no matter their nationality.
Sincerely,
Kathleen HagertyInterim Provost and Professor
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2020Announcements
Northwestern’s Commitment to an Inclusive, Global Academic Community June 2, 2020To members of the Northwestern international community,
In light of the U.S. government’s recent proclamation on the suspension of entry "of certain students and researchers from the People's Republic of China," we want to express Northwestern University’s commitment to being an inclusive, global academic community. 
This is essential to fulfilling our mission and to addressing our world’s most urgent challenges. Our Chinese students, scholars and faculty are deeply valued members of our community and full partners in these efforts, bringing important new ideas and perspectives to Northwestern.
The Northwestern Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) stands ready to support and advocate for all our international students and scholars. We encourage all members of our community with concerns regarding their status to reach out to their OISS advisor. 
Again, we want to emphasize our ongoing commitment to our Chinese students and researchers and to all our international scholars, whose presence and contributions enrich our entire academic community.
We will continue to work with our partners to advocate for our international scholars and to ensure that all members of our community can pursue their work as full and equal members of the university.
Best regards,
Kathleen HagertyInterim Provost and Professor
Milan MrksichVice President for Research
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2020Announcements
Update: Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and Researchers from China June 2, 2020On May 29, 2020 President Trump issued a “Proclamation on the Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and Researchers from the People’s Republic of China.” 
This proclamation went into effect June 1, 2020 and will continue until further notice. It suspends the entry of certain students and researchers from the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Specifically, the proclamation prohibits entry into the United States as a nonimmigrant by individuals who satisfy all of the following criteria:
Chinese national;
Traveling to the United States on an F or J visa;
Studying or conducting research beyond an undergraduate level (this does not apply to undergraduate students from China);
Have past or present ties to an entity in the PRC that implements or supports the PRC’s “military-civil fusion strategy,” defined as any actions by the PRC to acquire and divert foreign technologies to incorporate into and advance the PRC’s military capabilities. Please note that we do not yet have information on which PRC entities the U.S. government considers tied to the PRC’s military-civil fusion strategy. We will update this page with information on this as soon as it is available.
Again, we wish to emphasize that this proclamation applies only to those who meet all of the above criteria. Unless certain exceptions apply, it is unlikely that the U.S. Department of State will approve F or J visa applications for those who meet all of the above criteria. Additionally, the U.S. Department of State could revoke visas already issued to individuals who meet all of the above criteria. 
Among others, the proclamation does not apply to:

Lawful permanent residents of the U.S.
A spouse of a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident
Anyone in an immigration status or with a visa other than F or J
New and continuing undergraduate students
Any F or J graduate student or J scholar who “is studying or conducting research in a field involving information that would not contribute to the PRC’s military-civil fusion strategy.”
If you have an F or J visa stamp and think you might be impacted by this Proclamation, please contact the consulate that issued your visa stamp to confirm if the visa stamp has been or will be revoked as a result of the proclamation. This should be done prior to travel. The Northwestern Office of International Student and Scholar Services (OISS) also stands ready to support you. If you have any questions or concerns regarding your status, please do not hesitate to reach out to your OISS advisor. 
OISS will continue to issue immigration documents (I-20 and DS 2019) for any Chinese national. 
We will update this website as we learn more.
HomeAbout OISSNews & Announcements2019Northwestern University Message to Chinese Students
Northwestern University Message to Chinese Students June 7, 2019Dear Chinese students, 
In light of the Chinese government’s recent warning about the risks of studying in the United States, we want to reassure our Chinese students and scholars that they are critical to Northwestern University’s mission, and we are committed to assisting them in the visa process. To date, we have seen no visas denied for Chinese students and scholars who are coming to Northwestern, and we will continue to make efforts to help them in the process if they experience problems.
Northwestern is committed to being an inclusive and welcoming place for all international students. We cannot fulfill our mission to produce the highest caliber of research and solve problems of global significance without attracting the best talent in the world. To meet those goals, we envision an increase in the number of Chinese and international students and scholars at Northwestern in the years to come.
In mid-June, the Office of International Students and Scholars (OISS, formerly the International Office) will be represented in China -- in Shanghai, Beijing and Guangzhou -- for pre-departure orientations. We look forward to welcoming the next group of Chinese students to Northwestern in September as they begin the next step of their academic journey.
OISS and individual schools and programs will continue to help make our Chinese students feel welcome in an open and collaborative atmosphere. OISS helps simplify and streamline the requirements international students have to meet in order to facilitate realizing their academic goals. OISS also works with students if there are issues in the visa application process, and can assist Chinese and other international students when problems arise.
At Northwestern, knowledge knows no borders, and everyone at the University benefits from the presence of talented international students, faculty and staff. We recognize that these individuals play a powerful role in shaping our community, and we value them deeply.
 
Jonathan Holloway
Provost and Professor
